So as a recap for the last couple
lectures, uh we talked a lot about value
functions and Q functions. Uh we'll talk
about them more today. Uh and as a
reminder, value functions entry
functions are representing her sum of
future expected rewards uh starting at
sub and value function will teach
rewards partically
with respect to future rewards. uh and
you've seen these uh diagrams a couple
times where you can think about uh value
as
a reward uh state as function as
uh we've talked about a couple methods
so far. Uh the first method that we
talked about was policy where we
alternate between collecting data and
improving our policy. Uh we can think of
it as trying to sample for our policy
and increasing the log likelihood of
actions that have a higher reward in the
future. Uh where we subtract the
baseline in order to encourage the
policy to do more of the above average
things than it did before and less of
the below average things.
We then started to talk about active
criticisms. uh and in this part we
introduce an additional step of this
loop where we are first going to
estimate uh the expected future reward
for our policy and use that to improve
the policy. So we have this revised form
for our gradient for our policy where we
are still taking samples but increasing
the likelihood on actions that we think
are good and decreasing the likelihood
on actions that we think are bad.
So these are the methods that we've
talked about so far. Um we last semester
focused a lot on how to do this actor
critic algorithm in an off policy way.
So instead of only using the data from
the last from the current iteration
trying to be able to use all of the past
data from all past iterations. Uh and do
that we needed to be able to estimate a
Q function from past policy data. And do
that we can use a neural network half of
input a state and action and output the
value. uh and we derived this equation
um that's defining the Q function
recursively or we can think of the sum
of future rewards as the reward at the
first time step plus the Q function uh
starting at the next state and action.
uh we found that this equation holds for
any state in action and that means that
we can use uh previous state action and
next state pairs uh in order to try to
learn a key function and specifically
the way that we did that is we would
sample a state action next state from
our our buffer of previous data. Uh then
we'll sample a next action from the
current policy rather than from the past
policy. And then we will try to do
supervised learning on these targets
where the targets are using our estimate
our current estimate of the two function
for our policy. Um and we pass the input
the state the action the next state and
the next another sample.
So once we formulate this objective
using bootstrap values then we can uh do
supervised learning to try to not face.
uh we also talk about for these y eyes
to be accurate uh you need to have
sufficient coverage in your data set to
cover actions that your newest policy.
So today we're going to be covering uh
valuebased RL method and specifically
we'll be talking about uh what I think
arguably was the very first deep
reinforcement learning method uh and it
was based on the Q-learning algorithm uh
and so we'll be talking about Q-learning
and then we'll also be talking about how
to implement Q-learning in practice how
to make it stable and the goal for today
is to think about how Q functions relate
to policies how to do RL without
learning an explicit policy uh and how
to stabilize e-learning if your activity
Cool. Um, so we're going to start out
with a thought exercise uh and a
question uh for all of you to think
about. So um the
say you have some policy uh and for your
policy you have a pretty good estimate
of the Q functions uh and as a reminder
the well I'll put the definition of of Q
values up here where the future rewards
for a state in action
and an object that we're going to be
thinking about a lot today is uh if you
have some estimate of the Q function um
for uh in this case for a policy.
Then
one thing you could do is you could try
to uh instead of following some policy
that you've uh that you've already
learned, you could potentially uh
formulate a policy by choosing the
action that maximizes your
bunch of different candidate actions. uh
at a given state instead of following
your policy, you could pick the
candidate action that has the highest
speed up.
Um so to continue on this product side,
we'll define a policy that does exactly
that. Uh that policy has a probability
of one for taking the action that
maximizes the p value and has a
probability of zero otherwise. So this
is a deterministic policy that always
follows what the p value is telling you
is the best.
Um and then we'll look at this in in the
context of an example. So say that we
have some 2D navigation problems. Um
we're going to be starting somewhere in
this blue box and our goal is to reach
to the star. You can uh move like we can
move in 2D. Um the reward is one at the
star and zero elsewhere. So very simple.
Uh and let's say that our current policy
always goes to the right.
Um
and as one additional point of detail,
uh it takes if you're going to move up,
it takes one time step to move about
this distance and it takes about two
time steps to move this distance.
Um so my question for you uh is if you
define this new policy uh you have this
current policy that always goes right,
you have an accurate estimate of the Q
values for that policy. Um, if you
define this new policy, is that better
than the the current policy? Is it worse
than the current policy? Is it the same
as the current policy? Um, is it the
optimal policy? Uh, and why or why not?
Um, so I'll give you well, first any
questions about this example.
Okay. So, I'll give you a few minutes to
um talk to your neighbor about these
questions. Uh, and then we'll come back
and talk through uh the answer.
It seems like people are talking a
little bit less. So maybe you can come
back. Uh who wants to share their
thoughts?
Yeah. Um so let's summarize that and
then we'll talk about whether it's the
optimal policy. So um summarize the old
policy is going right. Uh and so uh that
is not optimal because if you're
starting here then you're not actually
going to hit the star. uh and the that
and if you think about what qpi is for
the old policy kind of everything in
this region right here has is going to
have a qi equal to one for all of these
uh for all of these state uh and
actions. Uh also the
um yeah and then if you start to think
about what uh what 2 pi looks like right
here um this is actually where it will
well actually sorry take that back. Um v
pi is equal to one for everything in
this row. It actually depends a little
bit on the action what the key function
actually is. uh if the for this row if
the action is the same as the policy
that should move right then if value is
one if it actually does something else
if it goes like up for example then it
might actually miss the star if it
follows the policy after that uh after
taking that action. Now if you look at
this row uh for this row two pi of all
the states in this row for the action of
going right is going to be zero.
uh but then if you look at the Q pi for
all the states here for the action of
going up uh what is the Q value for that
but it's one cool and so that's because
if you follow up and then follow the
policy we'll have a word of one and then
lastly if we go to this row uh if we
have uh s and then going up what is the
key value
zero our school. Um, and so what this
means is that we're going to get uh the
new policy. What it's going to do is
it's going to be uh going right here.
Uh, and then for everything in this row,
it will be going up because it's going
to be choosing the action that has the
maximum value of 2 pi. Uh, but then for
this row, all of the Q values are zero
because uh because all of the key values
for the next one are also zero. And so
um the uh if you default to the previous
behavior it'll stay going to the right.
And does anyone want uh to talk discuss
the second question like is is this the
optimal policy?
Yeah. So this policy, the new policy is
better than the old one, but it's not
the optimal policy because uh in these
states the optimal like the best policy
should be the one that also is going up
uh in order to get this. Yeah. So the
question was if we iterate this and do
it a couple times um this will become
the optimal policy, right? And yeah,
you're a couple slides ahead, but we'll
talk about doing this iteratively.
Yeah. So we can get a reward of one. The
question was why is this not the optimal
policy? So we'll get a reward of one
tier which is great but if we're
starting at this initial state we
actually will just keep on going right
we won't go up after defining this new
policy and so uh therefore it's not
going to get a reward of one from all
states.
>> Yeah. So the question is is there a
sense of like if you're getting closer
to the star the key would be higher
versus not. Um I actually didn't
explicitly define this but uh if you
have a discount factor that is below one
then it will get higher as you get
closer. Um everything I've shown here is
with a discount factor of one for
simplicity. But if you use a discount
factor of like 0.9 for example then the
Q value here would be one. Then it would
be 0.9 here. Then 08 here 7 here and so
forth. And then it would be um it would
still be like zero for this entire row.
um just because uh the um
uh because you're not you're kind of
still somewhat of a function.
The other thing potentially to note here
is that if your reward was denser as
like the reward function instead of
being one at the star and zero elsewhere
if it was for example the negative
distance to the star then you would
actually um I won't go through that uh I
won't go through that on the board but
if you go through that example you'll
actually see that even in a single step
um starting from this policy you would
actually get a policy that goes to the
star uh from policy. The question is um
if I wanted to get the optical policy, I
would need to iteratively do this and
reconsider um the two pie for the latest
policy every time. So yeah, that's true.
>> Yeah. So in this example, the question
is is it always better? Um in this
example, the new policy was better than
the current policy and um this is
actually always going to be the case. So
it's always going to be at least as good
as the previous policy. Um, and it's
never going to well assuming that QPI is
accurate, it's always going to be as
it's never going to be. Um, and now if
the optional policy, then it will be the
same.
This is starting to think about like can
we actually start omitting policies? Uh,
so the expected reward um when we do
this arg we're going to be taking the
best action um from state s if you then
follow the policy afterwards.
And this is going to be at least as good
as any action that the policy would have
taken. And uh regardless of what the
policy is, this is going to be yeah at
least as good as uh what that policy.
And you can see that because it's taking
the the action that has uh the maximum
expressive reward.
Um so potentially we could actually just
forget using policies and just do this
uh rather than actually explicitly
learning a neural network for the
policy.
Um and so what this looks like as an
iterative algorithm is we would run our
policy to collect data. Then we would
fit a model to estimate qi according to
uh that latest batch of data. You could
also do this in an off policy way like
we talked about in the last lecture.
Uh and then to improve your policy, you
can just define the policy uh to be the
policy that maximizes your Q.
Uh and then once you define that new
policy, you can collect some new data
and then estimate again QI but this case
QI for your new policy and not your old
policy. The policy pi is equal to this.
And so we're not learning a neural
network for the policy pie. uh we're not
explicitly representing it as a model
but we um it's helpful to have some
notation to refer to the system. The
only thing that's the only neural
network here the only model here is the
two.
>> Yeah. So the question is how do we
generalize this to continuous actions or
more expressive action spaces. So um
this is generally going to be easiest
when you have uh kind of a discrete set
of actions that you might take like
going up going to the right. uh if you
have continuous actions, you actually
can still use this algorithm. Uh the
although you need to figure out how to
perform that max operation, uh there's a
couple ways that you could conceivably
run this operation right here. Um in
principle, you could use something like
gradient defense, although uh that turns
out not to work very well. Um you can
potentially there's a variety of reasons
why it cannot work very well. And if
your actions are not very high
dimensional then you can um it might
actually be better just to simply try to
sample a bunch of different actions and
pick the one that has the highest p
value. Uh you can also there's other um
kind of sampling based optimization
algorithms where you can inter sample uh
and refine your estimates from there.
The um yeah so there's a couple things
you can do there. uh if you have a
discrete action space that that's like
like text for example in principle you
could um do uh some sort of like dispute
for over things where uh the Q value is
your um is what you're trying to to
maximize in that system.
>> Yeah. How does this work in cases where
the rewards are very sparse? So we saw
it one example where the rewards are
sparse and the um it can still work in
this scenario. Uh the thing that you
need to be aware of when the rewards are
sparse is that you may need to do this
loop of resetting the policy potentially
a large number of times because uh each
time you do this, you're actually like
the first time we only got a good policy
here. Um and now if this environment was
much bigger, that means that you need to
kind of keep on doing it um as you go
down. and what is often referred to as a
backup. You're sort of backing up the
reward from here to the other state. And
you'll need to do those backups um for
as long as the essentially full for as
long as the horizon of the problem is.
Um so you just need to make sure that
you're doing many uh iterations.
Okay. Um
cool. So
let's see. We can write this down as an
algorithm. Um and so we can take our off
policy actor critic algorithm that is
fitting pock and uh then instead of
using this policy gradient update simply
define a new policy that um that's
taking actions according to
you can think of this as really having
two key steps like what we talked about
one is estimating pi uh this is often
refer to as policy evaluations because
you're learning how to what the values
are for a policy.
Uh and note that you can you can do
multiple gradient steps here. Uh because
uh this is um this isn't like on policy.
Uh we're just trying to fit our target.
Uh and then the second step is improving
our policy. So it's we refer to it as
policy improvement.
Uh and this sort of two-step iterative
procedure is often called policy
iteration.
uh it's kind of uh on the way to an
algorithm like this. Cool. So on the
to write this out on the board, what
this looks like is
having a first step where you collect
data.
Um often times you might collect data
from pi. Uh it might also be it could
actually potentially be from some other
policy. Then you have a next step where
you're going to try to fit
your estimated function
for that policy.
Uh and next we can use the um the
targets that we defined in the last
of R of SA plus gamma
10
where these are from the buffer and this
is sampled from
our policy.
And then lastly, we'll improve our
policies by defining
the new policy
as
being
one if X is max value and zero.
The question is, is this policy
deterministic? Uh, yes, this policy is
deterministic. Um, the this is actually
one reason why you might not want to
collect data from this policy because,
uh, it's you're not going to have that
many data favors in your opinions. Uh,
and we'll talk in a couple slides about
what policy you might want to collect
data from.
Yeah. So the question is um when we're
fitting these targets why are we
sampling from a prime and ra why not do
a maximum over axis
or an average? So
um the
so you there's a couple things here. So
first you can you can uh you can do an
average uh and sample multiple times uh
and that can give you a better estimate
of the target value. Um the second thing
is that the um you can actually instead
of sampling this from pi you can
actually do this improvement step in the
q functions target itself.
Um so you can actually um instead of
defining yi this way,
you could consider
a target for your tube function to be
the reward plus gamma times
the max over a
prime of 2 s.
And what this looks like uh is something
like this.
Uh, and this actually is what gets us
to.
And one way to think about this, there's
a couple ways to think about this. The
first is that these targets are actually
your Q values for your new policy. Um,
so you're actually um you're already
putting the the improvement steps in
your Q function update and you're
actually learning the Q values
associated with the new policy that
you're going to be defining.
Um and there's actually another way to
look at this as well. Uh so
we previously defined this equation um
that's true for all states in action. So
we defined that the Q function is equal
to the reward plus the function at the
next state.
Uh this is true for all states and
actions and it's actually um also is
true for any pulse.
uh including the optimal policy
and you can actually write down another
equation that is specifically for the
optimal policy. Uh and in particular we
know that the optimal policy is always
going to be taking the actions that
maximize our future rewards. The optimal
policy is always going to be um the
action that it picks is always going to
be the one that maximizes the key value.
And so we can write down an equation
that holds just for the optimal policy
which is the same equation
as
the one there except instead of an
expectation over the next action it's a
maximization over the next.
Uh so what that looks like is
we're defining the t function as the
reward at the current time step plus the
sum of future rewards. And for that sum
of future rewards, we have some
expectation over
the next state that will happen. And
then
because we know that the optimal policy
or the best policy is going to be taking
the action that is maximizing the t
value then we can write this as the max
of
at the next state.
Yeah. So the question is why do we why
are we talking all about Q and why not
V? Um so you can actually also write
down these equations for V uh in the
same in like a a very similar way. We um
the thing that's very nice about Q is
that um we can actually get a policy out
of Q. So we uh we can if we know what Q
is then we can do this argmax over
action to get a policy that's better
than our previous policy. Whereas with
the value function, if we only know V of
S, then we don't know which action will
uh lead to higher.
Uh in principle with the value function,
you could try to do some sort of look
ahead. Like if you have a sense for what
the dynamics are, you could try to then
um you could try to predict what S prime
is and pick actions that are um are
maximizing that. Uh the And so what that
would look like is um
trying to like pick actions that lead to
um an expectation
uh a like a higher
value.
Um so you could in principle do
something like this uh with with V. But
uh we don't know what these dynamics are
and we can't necessarily predict what
the next state will be as a consequence
of an action. Uh and so in general it's
a lot harder to get a policy out of a
value function than is to and to improve
our policy ultimately um with a value
function than it is with a function.
So now going back to this equation um
this is true for the optimal policy and
write Q for the optimal policy here
where I'm writing pi star as the optimal
policy
and if you look at our update right here
um we're trying to fit a Q function that
is uh that's predicting this
and
essentially with this equation. You can
think about it as this update as we
trying to make this equation true. So
we're trying to make the left side of
the equation equal to the right side of
the equation. And with when the equation
is true, that means our policy is the
optical.
So essentially one way to think about
Q-learning is that when we're optimizing
step three, we're trying to find a Q
function such that it satisfies this
equation, which is only true for the
optimal
Yeah, sorry. the this is like it's an if
and only if so this only holds for the
optimal policy and if you have the
optimal policy then this
>> yeah great question um so the question
is if we have really good estimates of Q
um will this converge we'll talk about
this in one minute um so let's first
just talk about some terminology really
quick um reinforcement learning has a
ton of terminology uh it's useful to
know some of it so that if someone's
talking to you about reinforcement
learning or you're reading a paper, you
know what they're talking about it. Um,
this first equation is often referred to
as the Bellman equation. Uh, very useful
object. Uh, and it's what we were using
to try to do policy evaluations for a
policy. And the second equation, it's
called the Belman optimality equation.
Um, because it's specifically for
optimal policy. Uh, sometimes people
also like informally might call the
second one a bellman equation as well.
Um but yeah officially uh the first one
is solving equation. Second one is
solvality equation. Uh you can derive
ones that are equations like this that
are also for the value function B
instead of the Q function and people
often refer also refer to those as like
sol equation and sol.
Okay. Um so getting back to the question
if we do this iteratively will we
convert to um the optional policy
uh there's good news and bad news here.
Um the good news is that if you're in a
very simple setting uh where you can
actually store all of your key values in
a table for every single state and
action. Uh this would be like for a very
small discrete state and action space.
uh and if you have sufficient
exploration then this algorithm will
converge. Uh so that's the good news. Uh
the bad news is that uh basically in any
other scenario it is not guaranteed to
converge. Uh and you can construct
scenarios when it diverges even with
just linear functions. Uh which is kind
of sad. Uh
I guess the the flip side of that is it
even though it it can diverge in
scenarios uh it can be made to work very
well uh and we'll see some examples of
it working very well at the end of the
lecture.
>> Yeah. So the question is like what is
this this if if mean like what does this
statement mean? Uh and it is a bit
vague. So um specifically the it doesn't
necessarily have to do with the accuracy
of your t values because you're actually
going to be fitting um fitting your t
values like through this process. It's
more a statement of the size of your
state and action space and if it's small
enough that you can maintain this table.
Uh and there's also a condition on
exploration uh where you actually need
to have full coverage of the state and
actions in your data set. um then it
will complete. Okay. Um so one note
about this is Q-learning is off policy
uh and in particular this equation holds
for all state masses and it means that
we don't have to have the actions coming
from our current policy. Uh and in
particular it might actually make a lot
of sense for it to be broader than our
current policy. Uh because we're going
to be doing this maximization over our p
values. So this when we do this
maximization, we're going to be
considering a lot of different possible
actions. And we uh if we have a discrete
action space, we might actually just
consider all of the possible actions.
And when we do that, we would want our t
values to be accurate when we're
considering all of them. And if there's
one action that we haven't collected
data for that we're going to be
considering in this optimization, it
might be erroneously high because we
didn't collect any data for it. and then
you'll get an inaccurate um target value
when you are fitting or
and so instead of taking collecting data
from our current policy, it'd be useful
to collect data from some exploration
policy and specifically a policy that's
collecting a broader set of actions than
our deterministic policy.
Um so we want covered for a lot of
different actions specifically for this
term. Um and there's a couple choices
here.
Uh one choice is
to mostly follow our policy like to
follow our policy most of the time but
with some small probability take a
completely random action.
Uh, and so what that would look like is
a policy that um
with some probability
I say maybe you can write it as like
take a random action
with probability
at points and follow maybe we can call
this pi exploration and uh follow the
action.
follow your current policy
uh with probability 1 -
uh and
the you can write that out slightly more
formally up here. Uh and this can be a
good choice because it means that you're
when you take a un action uniformly at
random it means that you'll get very
good coverage of the actions that you
consider. Uh and
oftentimes during like as you proceed
through training you might start with a
larger epsilon uh so that you have more
exploration at the beginning of training
and then as your policy is getting
better and as you're getting a better
estimate of your Q function you can then
make this smaller and explore less as
you go through things.
Um so this is called epsilon greedy uh
because you are being greedy uh some of
the time and epsilon probability of the
time you're not being greedy and just
taking a risk.
Okay. Um and then another choice uh
that's also somewhat reasonable um
although a little bit more complicated
is to take actions with probability that
is proportional to the key values. And
so if you have actions that have a
higher t value then take those actions
more frequently. And if you act have
actions with lower probability then take
those actions less frequently.
Um one way to uh write this is you could
exponentiate your t values so that
they're all positive uh and then
normalize in order to get a distribution
over a probability distribution over.
Um sometimes this is called uh Boltzman
exploration um named after the Bolton
distribution where you exponentiate.
>> Yeah. So the question is how do you um
if you have it's straightforward to do
this with discrete actions. How do you
do these kinds of approaches when you
have continuous actions? Uh the first
one is indeed a lot more common with
discrete actions. uh the you can still
do something like this with continuous
actions but you would need to define
some uh some uniformish distribution
over your continuous actions. Um and for
that you would need some sort of range
or something. Uh instead you could also
use like a Gaussian distribution with a
wide standard deviation in principle
where you sample from that. Uh I think
in continuous action faces this second
option is a bit more um a bit more
common. uh in terms of sampling from it
um the
off top of my head I actually can't
can't remember the details of how you
would um sample from this but we can uh
post on edge after
it's possible that the way that you do
it is actually just to try to fit a
policy um but yeah we can talk about it
after okay so putting the pieces
together uh what a full key learning
algorithm looks like is we'll collect
data using some policy We'll add that
data to our replay buffer.
Then we will sample a batch of data from
our replay buffer uh uh uniformly. And
this is it's useful to sample a batch
kind of separately from what we just
collected uh so that we are
decorrelating um and sampling iid from
our replay buffer.
And then we will update our Q function
by taking the gradient of the uh L2 loss
with the target. And so if you write
that out, you'll get a gradient that
looks like this where um yeah, if you're
taking the L2 loss
then the um on the inside this is just
the inside of the L2 loss and then you
use the same rule to get the second term
right here that's back propagating into
your par. Um you can repeat these
multiple times. Um so you can actually
kind of take multiple gradient steps
after collecting a batch of data. Uh in
practice it's actually pretty common to
set K equals to one. Uh but you can it's
more efficient. You're going to be more
data efficient if you have a larger K to
take more gradient steps for a given box
of data. Uh and then you also iterate
this process um after you're done taking
these K gradient steps then you can
collect some more data uh and repeat.
Yeah. Yeah. So the question was if
you're collecting data from any policy,
wouldn't that be less optimal than um
than like using a good policy or at
least using your current policy? Yeah.
So the um the reason why you might use a
different policy is uh
the reason why you might use a different
policy is specifically to learn a more
accurate Q function. And so it's
actually going to help you learn a more
optimal policy later. And essentially
there's this trade-off between
collecting less optimal data at the
beginning to help you be better later
on. And one way to think about this is
if you are um say your reinforcement
learning agent is trying to help you
pick a restaurant, uh if you haven't
really explored that many restaurants to
know what is a good restaurant, then uh
at the beginning probably you want to
explore and actually try things even
even restaurants that might be
suboptimal um in order to get a good
estimate of like what good restaurants
are for a particular person. And then
later on um you once you have a good
cube function once you have a good
estimate for what good uh restaurants
are then you might want to then explore
less.
Um so kind of visually what this looks
like is you have some environment you'll
initialize your replay buffer as empty.
And then at this first step you'll run
your policy uh like the F1 3D policy uh
that's exploring in the environment.
You'll then get some transitions that
you put into your replay buffer.
Uh and then for this part, you'll then
use your replay buffer to update your
tree function on the data that you see
with the goal of trying to get uh
something that is not saying the key
function of the off.
Um so the question is when we combine
this with one like can we still call
this um off policy because we are
collecting data from potentially from a
policy that's very similar to our
current policy. Um because we're using a
replay buffer of essentially all of our
past experience um when we do these
updates it's referred to as off policy.
That doesn't mean that like none of the
data is from our current policy. So some
of the data in the replay buffer will be
from the current policy. Uh but
essentially what off policy means is
that you're not only using that data,
you're also using data from other
policies.
Um in practice what is the sum policy?
Yeah, so in practice it's exactly what
we talked about on the last slide. So um
the it would either be uh something like
epsilon and greedy uh where with some
small probability you're taking a random
action and otherwise calling the policy
uh or something where you're taking uh
actions in proportion to
And you might this might actually as we
talked about it might actually change
during training. Uh you might actually
change epsilon during training so that
you're more explor you're doing more
exploration at the beginning and less
exploration.
>> Yeah. So the question is are we
resetting our learning speed iteration?
Um oftentimes you will you'll keep your
old speed parameters around um kind of
warm start them and keep on training on
top of them.
one important thing. So the result of
this algorithm is Q. uh and then to
extract a policy out of that. The final
policy that you would then deploy is a
policy that um is acting according to
essentially just the acting pre-release
where it's taking the actions that
maximize your key. Oh, so if the size of
the replay buffer is one then like like
yeah one like one data point uh then
that would be on. So if it's like if
it's tiny uh then that's fully on
policy. In practice it's replay buffer
is a lot larger.
Oh. Oh. Oh sorry. Right. Um if the
replay buffer size is one if this policy
is not the same as as this then that's
still off policy because the policy is
different. Yeah. A good point. Uh so
yeah this policy might be different from
the one that like directly.
Yeah. So how do we manage our replay
buffer? make sure that we're not
oversampling states and so forth. Um
this is generally uh is actually an
important consideration with learning
algorithms and usually you will discard
old data. So you'll have like a first in
first out principle where uh this buffer
is not infinitely large. Uh oftentimes
with learning it is pretty large but you
will um you can just pick a fixed size
uh and then once you have filled it to
that size start discarding data and
discard the oldest data first. The um
one other consideration is that at the
very beginning of training the replay
buffer might be very small. Uh sometimes
to handle that you might uh try to
collect more data the very first
iteration to pre-populate it. Um there
are also algorithms that we won't quite
cover that do asynchronous data
collection and updates because data
collection takes time. updating a neural
network takes time. And so you could
actually have some threads that are
actually adding to the replay buffer and
other threads that are running updates
on your Q function. Um, with those
asynchronous algorithms, it's actually
especially important uh to think about
how this replay buffer is managed so
that you're not running like um like a
thousand gradient steps on one data
point and one gradient step on another.
Cool. Um let's learn uh let's talk a
little bit about what happens in
practice when you use these methods.
So um we talked about how Q-learning can
diverge and uh in general when you run
Q-learning with neural networks it can
be unstable and one of the reasons for
that is uh you have this moving target
this max is of two and it seems that our
optimization process is very
non-stationary uh especially if K is one
and
one trick is to try to slow down how
often you change the target uh the
target. So um instead of having these
targets changed every single time you
change your parameters
um one idea is you could freeze the
parameters of your target network and
only update them kind of periodically
only update them once um every 100
gradient steps or something like that.
So um what this looks like is we can
save a separate neural network uh
another copy of our two function
parameters.
We'll call this five star or five prime.
And when we save this out, then when we
for just for this target right here, we
can use these new parameters
U5 prime uh in our target.
These parameters will be frozen. Uh and
so it means that uh inside this inner
loop, the labels will not change. Uh and
so this inner loop is essentially going
to be doing supervised learning with
with some data being added to the replay
buffer. So this should be a lot more
stable. Supervised learning is a lot
more stable generally. Uh and then uh
only periodically then update our target
network parameters to be the same as our
latest uh function.
Um so once you use a target network uh
this is referred to as the GQM
algorithm. Uh it was introduced in 2013
was the basically the like the first DRL
method uh at least in in my opinion. Uh
and uh they found that you could
actually train neural networks to play a
variety of different Atari games. Uh and
it was yeah one of the first examples of
using reinforcement learning to train
neural networks to do a pretty
complicated task. uh and they were
actually training it directly from like
the the pixel observation uh from the
game
and prior to that a lot of the
reinforcement learning examples were on
like like very toy settings or very low
dimensional settings or something like
that. If you save two values of two two
tables of two values will that be the
same as it? Yeah. So um that's actually
not quite the case because you will
actually be collecting new data in this
loop and so you can't just store all the
key values. you actually do have to
store the parameters uh so that you can
then compute the key values for the new
data that you the target key values in
the new data. So you can't just store
these uh value.
Cool. Um and so this is one of the
algorithms that you'll implement in
homeless.
Um okay, so that's the first trick is
use a target network that you only
periodically update. Um there's two more
things that make you learning work a lot
better. Um and the first one is actually
looking at the accuracy of the key
values. So if you um if you look at if
you plot the reward over training
um the reward goes up. That's good. This
is a reward on the game of Breakout uh
and the game of Tucka. And if you also
plot the key values over the course of
trading, they're also going up. Uh and
so that is definitely what you expect
because the key values is representing
your average reward. So that's good. Um,
one other thing to note actually as like
a practical tip is, uh, when you're
looking at the loss function on your t
values during training, uh, when you
train with, the loss values will
actually often go up through training.
Uh, this is sometimes a little bit
alarming because you're used to loss
values going down. Uh, but the reason
for that is you're collecting new data
and that new data has higher t values
and so the scaling of your loss function
is increasing uh, throughout training.
And at the very beginning, if you're
getting one year of reward everywhere,
it might be very easy to get a loss
function. Um, so yeah, don't be alarmed
if your loss function is going up. Uh,
sometimes that means that it the the
algorith or the policy is starting to.
Um, so cool. This looks pretty good as
the predicted Q increases. So does the
return. Um you can also look at uh the
the value over training and you see that
right in the first case the values right
here are fairly uniform but once you're
in a state where you like really have to
go up then the key value for the action
of up is higher than going down or a no
up. Um likewise right here it's really
important to go up and so the key value
is higher for going up then the actions
of going down or no up. In the right
case, it doesn't really matter because
the ball is on the other side on the
opponent's side and so the P value is
more uniform. So when you visualize the
P values, they look pretty reasonable,
which is good. Um but then if you
actually plot like what the true
returns are, um the true returns are um
are shown in in red here on this red
horizontal line. And the estimate of the
values according to the two networks are
shown as this upper line. And you
actually see this very huge gap between
the estimate where the estimate is
always a lot higher than the true value.
Uh and so it seems like we're seeing a
lot of what's called overestimation
where function is overestimating how
good our policy is.
Uh and then there's this algorithm that
was introduced called double DQN that's
able to get a much more accurate uh
function and it's able to overestimate
far far less than DQ.
Let's talk a little bit about uh double
D. So and and overestimations in
general. So our target value
is um
let's see we're taking a max over action
right here.
And when we take this max, we're
choosing an action that maximizes this p
value. And you can another way to write
this is you can think of it
as um
right.
You can think about this quantity as
Q of I
of X um evaluated at the action
that is maximizing
our uh p5
and so we're both using an action that
has um that has a high key value and
evaluating the key value of that action
using the same key function. uh and this
means that if there is noise in our C
function
then it's very easy this this noise uh
it's very easy to basically pick actions
that are using that noise to get a
higher t value
and so this last term right here is
what's causing overestimation
um it's not perfect has some noise in it
uh as neural networks generally do and
the Um because the action selected
according to the Q is the same as what's
being evaluated
then you can really exploit that noise
and use actions that are have higher
value than they actually do because of
the noise.
Now
if you instead used a different Q
function for picking an action and
evaluating it then you can decorrelate
the noise. If you had three different
key functions, um they would have
naturally different uh different noise
and different errors if
uh and so if we have a way to use
different key values, we can actually
then eliminate this problem of
overestimation by essentially
deorrelating the noise by putting uh by
using a different Q function to estimate
the key axis here as to evaluate uh the
axis.
And so the key idea behind double Q
learning is to have is use two different
networks. one network, network A for um
for picking the actions and network B
for evaluating
and then if they're noisy in different
ways, then we're not going to then be
kind of exploiting noise in our values
and then as a result not overestimating
our val. The question is, can you
guarantee that they don't have the same
noise? um the I guess it's like you
definitely can't guarantee it and there
might be some noise that's a result of
like the architecture of the network. Um
but in practice uh this ends up making a
really like if you are using different
neural networks for this uh it generally
does a very good job. there's still some
uh some overestimation and if we looked
at the at these values like here in this
game the key values are still an
overestimate still an over here um and
also here as well but it helped uh
substantially compared to uh not so it's
not perfect uh but it helps quite a bit
uh the question is what if you did like
triple DQN or or quadruple DQN like use
even more network um
it's a good question I see that like gap
perhaps that if that um if the noise
correlation if you're able to get like
even more samples of noise that could
help um the it could be interesting to
try that in practice. If the noise is
coming from is instead coming from a
source that's like kept constant like
like the architecture of the neural
network or something like that then it
might not help um until you start to
introduce those uh and then in practice
uh using more than two neural networks
uh is very impactful.
How do you ensure that they don't
diverge? So let's actually talk about
what we what we actually do. So um
we're actually already learn using two
neural networks. We're using we have the
current neural network and the target
neural network that was just
periodically frozen. And so what we can
actually do is um when we do our Q
update, we can use the target network
uh Q5 prime for evaluating and the
current neural network for picking the
app uh and
the um and yeah, so that's essentially
what double Q looks like where instead
of using the target network for both of
these, we're going to use the current
network to take the action to pick the S
action and then the turn.
Yeah. So you're always your previous is
always going to be your previous Q and
so you can't.
Yeah. So this is why does this help? Um
especially if the previous Q is the same
noise. So um the previous Q will be
outdated and the new Q will have gotten
a lot of gradient updates since then.
And so um and I've seen like new data
points recently. Uh and so um oftentimes
the noise isn't just about YP
initialization but it also has to do
with what what up creating updates were
applied. Um and so yeah
okay the last trick we'll talk about uh
which we've already talked about in
actritic methods is mstep return. So our
Qarning target looks like this we have
the reward plus the max of Q.
If your Q values are good, then this
term is actually going to be really
really important and playing like most
of the roles in the Q-learning update.
Um, but if your T function is bad, uh,
like at the beginning of training, then
these are really the only values that
are going to matter and these are the
values that are going to be giving your
learning algorithms.
And if you just have a single reward
function here, then that might be a bit
troublesome because uh just a single
reward function might not tell you that
much about how good your key value is.
Um so if you remember when we talked
about active critic methods, we talked
about um using nstep return. So we use
this bonner, we would use the sum of
words. If we use bootstropping, we just
do R + B like the R at the current time
step plus the V at the next time step.
And instead, we talked about this thing
that we could do in the middle where we
sum the rewards over the next end time
step and then use the value at the time
step after that. We talked about how
this has less variance and lower bias.
And lower bias in the sense that if your
targets are bad, um the reward function
is going to be more accurate.
So can we do this for p values? Uh and
what this would look like for t values
is um instead of having something like
this uh say this is the target for um
you're trying to get the target for sat
then you would define uh yi to be
uh r at the current time step plus r at
the next time step up until
are at t + n minus one time step
and then
at the time step after that use the max
of
q of s t + n uh
where this maximization is over a sub.
Um this is what ends up returns uh could
look like for learning.
Um does anyone like see any pos
potential issue with using this target?
Yeah. So if you're doing this off policy
these Rs will be coming from whatever
policy you used in the replay buffer
rather than um the pol rather than like
the optimal policy what you're trying to
estimate.
So there's kind of pros and cons here.
One is that it's a lot more biased, a
lot faster to learn on, especially early
on. Uh but the downside is that these
rewards are for the policy that
collected the data, not for the optional
policies. And we're trying to estimate
the key function for the optional
policy. Um so this is a a kind of a
downside uh when using n returns risk
learning.
Now um and this is not an issue with uh
n equals 1 uh because there the reward
will just be a function of s and a and
we're
estimating the q value of f of a.
Um now what do we do about this? Maybe
the unsatisfying answer is that uh most
commonly just ignore this uh pretend it
isn't true and still use an any n
greater than one. Uh and ends up returns
truly are often like really like very
often improve the performance of the
algorithm despite being incorrect.
That said, there are other things you
can do. Uh you can dynamically choose n
and only use data that follows the
current policy. basically looking at
what actions were taken and seeing if
those actions actually agree with the
maximum key value.
Uh you could also in principle
dynamically choose n and have n be
smaller later in training where your q
values are likely to be more accurate.
Now for this particular choosing of n,
you really would want to do this uh only
if the action space is small and the
data is mostly on policy. Um and you can
also do important sampling uh as well
and weight this uh weight these rewards
by uh some important.
>> Great. So those were the the kind of
three strikes for learning in practice.
Um there's a couple examples of learning
that have been very successful that I
put on this slide. Uh I think there's
other examples too but um one of the
most prominent examples was for playing
uh games and if you want to train an
agent to play a game either uh for
either just for uh the sake of seeing
how well you can do um or to play
against a human uh it learning was able
to outperform most people on Atari
games. Uh so this bar right here is like
everything above this bar are the games
that it is at human level or above human
level performance and everything below
is worse than human level performance.
Uh and then it also was used to train a
uh robot grasping system. So this is
actually a case of continuous action. Uh
and the uh the robot on the right is a
um is using a Q function that was
training learning. uh and then it is
doing a kind of continuous optimization
over action that will try to uh yeah
find a good uh a good way to grasp the
uh and we talked a bit last time about
how with RL you can get much higher
success rate and more reliable policies
and we see that here too where uh this
system was able to get like a 96%
success rate so quite high uh at being
able to drop
um The other thing that's nice about
using RL for this application is um the
you end up um if you if in order to
graph you need to uh not just like go
down and pick something up, but you
actually need to like move around the
object. uh it's also able to learn how
to do that using um using the
reinforcement because it's treating it
as as
cool. Um I think one of the last things
I figured I would cover is some of my
advice on when to use one online RL
algorithm versus another since this is
the last online RL method that we'll
talk about. Uh so you talked a bit about
PTO um SAT and DQM. Those are like some
of the three main tactile algorithms he
talked about. Um so PTO uh this is great
when you care about stability and ease
of use. Uh generally doesn't require too
much tuning. Uh but it's very data
inefficient and so it's great to use
when you care about stability and ease
of use and you don't really care about
data efficiency.
Uh DQN works quite well uh when you have
discrete actions or lowdimensional
system actions. Uh and so in those cases
it can be a great choice. It can be
fairly data efficient uh depending on
some of the details of how officially
you make it. And then um soft critic and
and variants of it uh are great when you
care most about data efficiency um but
require a bit more tuning and are a bit
less stable than u than something like
so the what we talked about is Qing also
learning in practice the three tricks
for target network double DQN and
separate terms we defined like the
Bellman equation and the Bellman
optimality equation um yeah and that was
like essentially
overview of how to do RL without
learning in explicit policy.
Um we're done with online reinforcement
learning algorithms for now. Uh and
yeah, we covered a lot of the basics of
different online reinforcement learning
algorithms.