I'm Keon Katon Fuj and I am the
co-creator and co- lecture with Andrew
for this class CS230. Um, and I will
teach about half of the inerson lectures
this quarter. Outside of Stanford, I I
work in industry. I I lead a company
called Warera, which uses AI to measure
skills. Um, and with the history of
CS230 students that have started AI
startups and companies, what I try to do
usually is to bring a lot of examples
from industry. So what you should expect
from these in-class lectures is not as
much of the academic side of things
which we learn anyway in the online
videos but also the industry um specific
input and some of the topics that we'll
cover this um year together include um
decision making in AI projects which
we're going to see today. You know, I
want you to come out of today's lecture
feeling like you had some fun, it was
interactive, and also you have a better
way to make decisions in AI projects
because you've seen how deep learning
researchers, engineers, and scientists
make their decisions solving problems in
industry. Um, other topics later in the
quarter for the in-classroom time
include things like, you know,
adversarial attacks and defenses. we
might have some time to cover it today.
Deep reinforcement learning which is
really hot in the market right now and I
think it's very important to know about
it. Um and then all the stuff that is
very practical like uh retrieval
augmented generation AI agents multi-
aent system as we go deeper into the
class and you get the baggage of neural
networks we'll be able to cover even
more fun topics.
Okay. So today's uh lecture is going to
be uh structured in three parts uh maybe
four depending on whether we have time.
We'll start with a little recap of the
week um what you've learned online about
neurons and layers and deep neural
networks. Then we get into a set of
supervised learning projects
including a day and night simple, you
know, vanilla classification, the
trigger word detection, which which is
actually a project you're going to build
at the end of the class yourself. Um,
and then face verification, which we'll
see also variation of how face
verification algorithms work. In the
third section, we'll focus on
self-supervised learning and weekly
supervised learning. Don't worry if you
don't know these terms. We're going to
learn them together. Um, and we'll talk
a lot about embeddings because
embeddings are the connective tissue of
many AI systems online today and it's
important to know about them. And
finally, if we have time, we'll also
talk about adversarial attacks and
defenses. With more and more AI systems
in the wild, knowing how to defend them
is very important. And knowing how to
attack them can also teach you how to
defend them. So uh we'll cover that as
well. Sounds good. Uh please interrupt
me as we go through the lecture. Uh we
want this to be very um conversational
as much as possible. So recap of the
week um is the the core way that um AI
learns from data in a traditional
supervised learning setup. You can think
of it as an input such as this little
image of the confused cat um and an
output in this case a number between
zero and one that represents the chance
that there might be a cat on the picture
one or there's no cat on the picture
zero what the model is and often time
you'll see me refer to the model as two
things there's an architecture which is
essentially the blueprint of the model
the skeleton and parameters it might be
a few parameters, it might be billions
of parameters like the models that
OpenAI, DeepMind, and others work on.
Um, outside of that, uh, and so when you
think about AI models being deployed in
the wild, like when you think about
what's happening with chat GPT, uh, what
you know, you can you can really come
down to there's two files somewhere on
the cloud. one that describes the
architecture of the model, one that
describes the parameters that are part
of this architecture and you keep
calling that to those two files and you
get your inference or your output.
That's really what's happening behind
the scene. Much more complicated than
that obviously, but those are the two
critical components of a neural network
architecture and its parameters that are
trained.
How does the model learn is through a
gradient descent optimization. Meaning I
send the picture of the cat through the
model and the model at the beginning is
not trained. So it's probably wrong. It
tells me I think there's no cat. I think
it's zero. And then I use something
called the loss function to compare the
ground truth. There is a cat on the
picture with the prediction from the
model at this point in time. those two
numbers are far from each other that
should be a penalty which the loss
function describes and then in order to
give feedback to the parameters we use
this gradient descent update. We do that
many many times. What it means is that
we take our parameters and we tell them
hey you should go a little bit more to
the right or a little bit more to the
left um until that number that is the
prediction for the cat is closer to the
ground truth. We do that with batches of
data, millions of images of cats and
images of anything else. And we give
that feedback
repetitively to the model until the
parameters are calibrated and the model
is in fact finding the cat on this
picture.
Nothing new here. You've seen it in the
videos. Any question on that learning
setup?
No. Okay. Easy. So far, there's many
things that can change in this setup and
you'll see in the class. First thing is
the input. The input does not have to be
an image. It can be text like when you
chat, you know, we chat GPT. It can be
audio. It can be video. It can be
structured data. It can be spreadsheets
and numbers. Those we'll see a variety
of examples in the class and how it
influences the architecture.
The output again doesn't have to be zero
and one. This is an example of a
classification. Um, you could turn this
problem into a regression. For example,
if I was asking you what's the age of
the cat, estimate the age of the cat,
that would be a regression task, not a
classification task anymore. Later in
the class, we'll also see generative
task. In fact, lecture four is going to
focus on diffusion models, generative
adversarial networks where the output
actually is much bigger than the input
typically, you know. So, you can have a
low resolution of a cat as input and the
output is a high resolution of the same
cat. the the output is bigger than the
input which can be counterintuitive to
people. Um other things that can change
include the architecture.
You've learned about the vanilla
multi-layer perceptron or the fully
connected neural network. That's what
we're learning right now online
together. Um by the end of the class
you'll have many architectures that
you'll be familiar with from RNN and
convolutional neural networks uh
transformer models. All of these at the
end of the day use the basis neural
network that you're learning right now.
They're just stacked on top of each
other differently.
Uh the loss function is actually a big
focus of today's class and of the class
in general. The loss function which is
what gives the feedback to the model um
you were right or you were wrong and
what to do about it is an art. designing
good loss functions. You know, great
deep learning researchers are very
creative when it comes to designing loss
functions. And in fact, when we built
the algorithm called YOLO, it's it is
called YOLO. Um for you only loop once,
not you only live once. But YOLO has a
very, you know, difficult to understand
at first loss function. And there's a
reason why the loss function was
designed like that. So by the end of
this class, you'll also have a better
intuition on how do we design great loss
functions.
Uh other things I'm not going to cover
right now, the activation functions in
your neural network, the optimizer that
you use for your gradient descent loop,
and then the hyperparameters that might
come in when you train your algorithms.
Okay, nothing new here. Um this is the
basic setup. You've also learned this
week about neurons. The easiest way to
think about a neuron is the classic
logistic regression um algorithm where
I'm taking the image of the cat. So an
image in computer science the way the
machine reads it is three channels RGB
for the three colors red, green, blue
and we take all these numbers we put
them in a vector. The vector is then fed
into a neuron and the neuron has two
components. the linear part, W wranspose
X plus B, W being the weights and B
being the bias, and then an activation
function, in this case, the sigmoid
function, which is very handy because it
takes any number and it puts it between
zero and one, so that the output can
look like a probability.
Classic setup. And here the probability
is 0.73
which is above 0.5 which tells me the
model thinks there's a cat on the
picture because one is a cat, zero is no
cat.
So question for you to get started. How
would you modify this binary
classification that detects cat in an
algorithm that would be able to detect
multiple animals such as a cat, a dog,
and a giraffe?
What do you need to change about this?
neural network. Yeah.
>> Okay. So, you would change the output
layer to match to the number of animals
you want to detect. Yeah. Correct.
Anyone wants to add anything else? Yeah.
>> The data that goes in there, how would
you change the data?
>> Okay. Very good. Yeah. You need you need
data from dogs and giraffes and also
maybe nature in general. What else do we
need not to forget? Yeah,
>> maybe you could add a neuron each and
then your prediction would be whatever
is the highest.
>> Yeah. Okay. Add one neuron per animal.
Those neurons will be independent from
each other and each neuron would focus
on one animal. Yeah, good point. So
actually what we're going to do so yes,
I think your suggestions were the right
one. We could multiply this output layer
to have three neurons instead of one.
All of them because it's a fully
connected neural net see the entire
pixels flattened in the vector and then
each of them will be focused on an
animal. The number one mistake that we
see in projects is that people add more
data but forget to adjust the labels. So
how do the labels need to be adjusted
here? It's not anymore zero and one,
right? What type of labels do we need?
to train this.
Yeah.
>> Yeah. Okay. You know how we call that or
no?
>> Okay. So, yeah. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Vectors. Yeah. I think you're
seeing the same thing. But the Yeah. So
here you would you would use a one hot
vector or a multihot. You know one hot
means we'll have
you'll have a vector of size three and
if there's a cat on the picture the
label is going to be 0 1 0 because the
second neuron is going to be responsible
to detect cats. Um in fact that would be
called the one hot vector. Often time
you'll have multiple animals on the
picture because cats and dogs can appear
together. cats and giraffes less so and
dogs and giraffes. I've never seen one
in the same picture, but anyway, um
you'll have a multihot vector. If you
have a cat and a dog on the picture,
you'll probably label it as 1 zero. And
the reason I'm mentioning that, it may
sound silly, but in a lot of projects,
people change their data. They forget to
change their labels and then they wonder
why it doesn't work.
Okay, cool. Now, in the class, we use a
specific notation with superscript and
subscript. So when you see me refer to
something like um a11,
the superscript in square brackets
indicates the layer that you're in. So
you're in the first layer. Uh the
subscript refers to the index of the
neuron. Okay? And a is for activation.
So a subscript three square bracket one
is a is the the output of the third
neuron of the first layer. Okay.
Again if I continue second layer would
be written like that. And then you'll
get your probability. The deeper the
network is the more capacity it has.
This the word we use capacity.
What it means is that if you send a
million pictures of cats and a million
pictures of non-cats to a shallow
network, it might not have the capacity
to learn what's in the data set. It's
just not flexible enough. The deeper the
network, the more capacity it has. So in
fact, a network that is super deep.
Imagine a billion parameters transformer
model with 1 million pictures of cat and
non-cat. It will just overfeit to those
pictures. Meaning it's not going to
learn what a cat is. is just going to
learn by heart those million pictures
because its capacity is way bigger than
the data set it's fed. So it's very
important to understand the amount of
data you're going to feed and the
complexity diversity of that data will
probably dictate the capacity of the
models you need to use.
Okay. Now just to give you a little bit
more intuition on what happens inside
those neural networks. We take this
relatively shallow network but you know
call it three layers and we train it on
a data set of facial images.
Ignore the task in in in face data sets.
There's a lot of tasks you could do. You
could do a face verification. You could
do a face recognition. You could do um
you know face uh clustering things like
that. We we'll talk about that later.
But let's say it's been trained really
well on understanding faces. If you now
unpack this network and you sort of
query each neuron and look what's going
on inside, what you'll notice is that
the first layers are going to be better
at encoding low complexity features
while the deeper networks are going to
be better at encoding higher complexity
features. So here's how it goes. Nothing
too complicated for now. the neuron in
the first layers, they're looking at
pixels because you're giving them
directly the pixels. So, they're going
to be good at stitching those pixels
together. And maybe the first neuron
will be good at detecting a diagonal
edge. The second neuron will be good at
vertical edges and the third one at
horizontal edges because they're just
looking at pixels and trying to make
sense out of them. Now, you go one layer
deeper in the middle of the network.
Those are not seeing pixels. they're
seeing the output of the first layer
which is already slightly more complex.
So what you can expect the layers in the
middle of the network to give you or to
activate for is higher level features
like an eye or a nose or an ear because
it turns out if you have a few edges you
can start detecting circles. And so you
would see a neuron that is really good
at detecting circles eyes. The deeper
you go in the network, the more you get
closer to the task itself, which in this
case, facial analysis, let's say, you
would see the last few neurons detect
larger features of the face because
again, they're seeing higher complexity
information. Does that make sense?
This concept, you know, we call it
encoding. We'll also talk about
embeddings. It's very important because
when you train neural networks, you want
to make sure first that they're
understanding what they're doing and
that's one way to see it. We'll have an
entire lecture on interpreting and
visualizing neural networks later this
quarter. Um, and on top of that, um, you
probably can make use of some of those
encodings and embeddings. We we'll see
that later. But why in the vector space
the distances between those concepts are
important? You can already imagine that
for for tasks like search searching in a
database having a neural network able to
encode information in a very meaningful
way can allow you to find concepts that
are close to each other and associate
them with each other and concepts that
are far from each other and dissociate
them from each other.
Okay, so this was the warm-up for today.
how much time we spent. Okay, 15 minutes
on the warm-up. That's good. So, we
learned a few new words. Model
architecture parameters. I didn't talk
about it, but feature engineering versus
feature learning. That's the core uh
concept in in deep learning is feature
engineering is what we used to do before
deep learning, which is you might
actually build an algorithm that is good
at detecting eyes. It's just good at
scanning eyes. manually build it, you
know, and then you build another one
that is good at detecting a mouth, a
mouth, and then you put them together to
feel detect faces. We don't do that
anymore. We do end to end learning,
meaning we let the data speaks for
itself and train the model. This is
called feature learning. It's automatic
and that's how the neural network
actually learns those features without
you needing to tell it eyes are
important to detect faces. You don't
need to do that.
um encoding and embedding the the real
difference is encoding is any any vector
representation. an um an embedding
though sorry it should have been an
embedding is when an encoding has
meaning the distance between two
encodings has has meaning you know they
might be close or far from each other
and it tells you something there's a
logic to it
and then we talked about one hot and
multihot vectors okay so end of the
recap now let's go into supervised
learning projects and we're going to
make decisions together and walk through
it the first case study is day and night
classification. So here's my problem for
you. Given an image that I give you,
classify it as whether it's the day or
whether it's the night. Okay, open-ended
problem. Ignore that foundation models
exist. You don't have access to chat GPT
or cloud or whatever. The point is to
get under the hood and have those
discussions because obviously it's a toy
example. So uh what do you do like what
what what data do you want to collect to
solve this problem?
Start.
>> Yes.
>> So tell me more. Check how pixels in the
same row are.
>> Just
see how they are very different.
What does it tell you that if you look
at the row of pixel and the row next to
it, if they're very different, what does
it tell you?
>> Okay, so you say if the delta between
pixels that are close geographically to
each other um is high, then there's
probably colors color changes. So it's
day most likely. Is that it? Okay. So
that that's an example of a of feature
engineering is like you're you're going
for it and great like you're going for
it and you're trying to understand
what's a pattern that tells me that a
picture is day or night. What else can
you do
in the world of neural networks?
Any other ideas? Yeah.
>> Just feed in a bunch of pictures like
half that are during the day.
>> Okay, good. Yeah. So yeah, I agree. Uh I
said 10,000 images, but how how do you
even determine how many pictures you
need
to get started with this project?
>> H
>> feed some data. So you start with like
10 pictures and then you continue to go.
Yeah, you could do that. Might, you
know, take some time. I think the
question is how easy is it to collect
that data? Like how would how would you
collect that data? probably for the same
location you get pictures for day
pictures.
>> Okay. Yeah, we could put our phone out
there and record the day and the night
and have a stream of pictures and add it
to the data set. Same location but
different uh lightings. Yeah,
>> Andrew mentioned that this was a very
hard problem because um in my opinion
also it depends on how like what kind of
model you want to have, right? For
example, if you were building something
for one location to sense like whether
it's day or night, then that one
location would be really nice. But then
if you were trying to look at like
anywhere in the world like in any kind
of planet whether it's day or night then
you would have to have like an extremely
diverse set of images and because the
problem is so broad you would have also
made like so many like a huge amount of
>> that's a great point. So just to repeat
for the the the people online uh you
have to define the task first because
the task can be easy. You can you can be
in a park in a very specific location
and say just detect if it's day or night
or you can have a problem which is your
camera can be anywhere and that makes it
more complicated and also the amount of
data you'll need is probably much more
for that second problem. That's what you
said right now. Actually that's a great
thread. Tell me about cases where this
problem would be really hard to solve.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Indoor indoor pictures actually.
Can you How could you tell if you took a
picture of me with the screen here? You
know what time it was? You couldn't. You
actually can. Yeah, there's a clock
here. Um so that that's very interesting
because um because if that was part of
the task then our problem would be hard
and 10,000 images is not going to cut it
to understand time you know and so it's
very important to define the task very
well what else can be hard other than
indoor pictures
>> the clock could be
>> also
>> also the clock can be AM or PM but you
can probably take additional information
which is how people are dressed and
think that it might be warmer outside
than colder. You could again it can be
very complicated at the end of the day,
but a human would say someone is
teaching, students are in class. It's
probably not
12:00 a.m., you know, or so I mean like
it gets complicated. Yeah. What else can
be hard?
>> Okay. Sunny, cloudy. Yeah.
>> Great point. If you're in the north of
Norway right now or Sweden, even the
clock can't tell you probably if it's
day or night. Yeah.
>> Dawn and dusk.
>> Dawn and dusk. Yeah, exactly. Those are
great examples. Actually, this is a good
semantic one because you need also to
define exactly what's the definition of
day and night. So, long story short, um
the problem can seem easy at first. It
can be very complicated. And trust me,
if you wanted to do this really well,
even the foundation models today
couldn't do it in certain cases. Yeah.
Um, okay. Let's say we have 10,000
images and you talked about the split of
images earlier and I agree with you, you
want a mix of different situations in
order to be able to cover all of them.
Um, and going back to our discussion on
model capacity. If it's you if it's just
a simple problem, you probably need just
a small capacity model. If you want to
add all these edge cases, you probably
are looking for bigger capacity models
and more data.
What's the input to our model?
I think someone said it already. So
let's say a picture of um a picture of a
you know day or night or whatever.
What's the resolution we're going to
work with? How do you determine
resolution when you build a data set and
why does it matter?
>> Yes.
>> Okay. Okay. So, you want to choose a
resolution that's going to be the same
across the board. You're going to
vectorize everything that's going to fit
in the same size matrix. Yeah. Why is it
important to have the right resolution?
Let's say
>> I think it's important to have similar
resolution.
>> Okay. So, you're saying we want
homogeneity in the data set in terms of
resolution. I would say that could be a
thing, but you know today you can
actually write scripts that downsize
high resolution images before it gets in
the model and so it would probably solve
upsizing is slightly harder. You would
need another algorithm. But you know
it's okay to have different resolutions
but you you still want to know what's
the target resolution that you're
looking for.
>> If you have too low resolution you lose
some of your features but if you have
too high resolution too much data a lot
of ways to optimize.
>> Exactly.
>> Exactly. Low resolution we lack
information. So we might get things
wrong. For example, the clock might not
appear in the picture if it's too low
resolution. High resolution means more
compute needed. If you have big
pictures, it's going to be heavier to
train your model and you're going to pay
more and also your cycles of iterations
are going to be longer in an AI project.
That's why resolution matter a lot. So
my question is what resolution do we go
for?
Is there a way to just get to a number
really quickly in the next 10 minutes?
Let's say if we were doing that project.
>> Yeah. Who's
see?
>> Yeah. Exactly. I think that's a great
idea. You're saying use the human as a
proxy. Yeah. So actually this is how we
did it back in the days. We would print
um pictures in different resolutions and
run it through our friends and say can
you tell if it's the day or the night
and it turns out that below a certain
resolution they can't anymore. It's just
like I don't have the information I
need. And you know where we ended is
somewhere around 64x 64x3.
And I stress the three u because later
this quarter we'll see that open AI and
deep mind deep mind as well in
reinforcement learning you know turns
out for one of the famous algorithm we
learn together for um reinforcement
learning uh discovered that you can
actually remove colors and the model is
not impacted but your training is way
simpler. You know, in this case, I think
colors matter because of the blue sky
because it does have an inherent
information about whether it's day or
night. And it turns out the task if you
give it to humans is much harder without
colors than it is with colors. Yeah. So
those type of insights we could get over
the next 10 minutes literally by using
humans as a proxy. This is a toy
example, but I want you to think about
that in your AI project. You're going to
be at points where you want to validate
a hypothesis and the best proxy you'll
have is the human. Yeah.
Okay. What's the output for this model?
>> Yeah. Day or night zero or one? Yeah.
>> Question. Is there on how many input you
have and how many you have layer? Do you
just start from
the relationship?
>> Yeah, good question. So, does the size
of the image impact the input layer? The
size of the input layer. Is that it?
>> Yeah, it it doesn't. You can make your
decisions. You can you can have three
neurons and you send a massive picture
inside it. um often time and that's why
I I often say deep learning is an
engineering field you have to try it or
you have to know the hacks um uh
typically the the network if it's a you
know this in in in a binary
classification you're going from a high
dimensional input to a very low
dimensional output. So by nature, you'd
imagine your network is going to be like
this probably, meaning you need more
edge detection at the beginning and then
higher feature and higher feature until
at the end it detects the face. So it's
going to be like that. We're going to
see examples in week four where the
output is bigger than the input and your
network is probably like this, you know.
So you'll build intuition during the
class to know when you want to downsize
your input layer or upsize your input
layer. Yeah. And by the way, these hacks
are valuable. Like why does Meta go out
and give crazy offers to a few
researchers? Because they know that
stuff. They know those hacks literally.
Okay.
Um Okay. So uh again someone said it the
output is 0 or one. The last activation
is going to be a sigmoid. Yes. Question.
>> Yeah. Instead of forcing yourself to
pick a specific solution, you come up
with a more general model.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, you can do that. You can probably
say in the data set, I don't care of the
sizes because I'm scraping data from
everywhere. I'm collecting data on my
phone. I'm putting it all in a database.
I write a script that down samples or
upsamples everything to the same
resolution. And then I send those lower
res images in the network because what I
care about is the training of my
network. I want it to be fast and
efficient. You could do that. Yeah, for
sure. Yeah. And there are networks we're
going to see in the YOLO is an example
of a network where in the early in the
later versions of YOLO, it does that
automatically. It can take any
resolution and it just samples it
accordingly. Um, okay. Last activation
is going to be sigmoid. We wanted the
output to be between 0 and one. and the
architecture most likely a shallow
network. We don't need too much capacity
unless the task is highly complex and a
convolution should do the work really
well. You don't know what a convolution
is yet. You're going to know in a few
weeks. But those are known to be good
for sequences and for images. And
finally, the loss function. What loss
function would you use?
>> Huh?
>> Which one?
>> Sigmoid.
>> Sigmoid. No, sigmoid is the activation.
What's the loss function?
>> Logistic loss. Yeah, logistic loss, also
called binary crossontropy loss, which
is the one you've seen in the videos
this week,
>> you know. Yeah.
>> Uh when you're like selecting your
images and your resolution, how much
does like designing that around the
hardware matter? Like if you have
certain, you know, memory bandwidth, you
know, adder sizes, c
Is that an issue or do you just let that
go?
>> So, repeating the question, how much the
amount of hardware and the quality of
the hardware you have at your disposal
influences those decisions. The answer
is a lot. Um, but you know, in fact, I'm
assuming you're training it on your
laptop right now, which will work, but
you need to make those trade-offs. And I
think that's why those skills matter.
Now if the task is more complicated, you
look at the hardware you have available.
You'll make a quick back of the envelope
calculation. The calculation is really
about how fast our iteration cycles can
be. It's not about necessarily the
performance of the model in the end. You
want to be able to iterate super
quickly. And if your model takes one
year to train, you're not going to be
able to iterate. You know, you need to
reduce it somehow.
>> So there are situations though where
going from like 64 by 64 to 65 by 65,
you double your compute time depending
on
>> Yeah. Yeah. For sure.
>> Yeah.
>> Are the features of the model like every
scaler in the 64x 64 by3 array?
>> Uh what do you mean the
>> like the features is every single scal
value.
>> So the 64x 64x3 is like literally you
look at a picture and you look at one
pixel. These have three values that
describe the color, right? And then you
just flatten it and then those numbers
are given to the input layer of your
neural network.
>> Yeah. Right. Um, okay. Let's move on.
Just for the sake of time, this was just
the easy warm- up. The two things I just
want you to remember from that project
is we're going to build a lot of proxy
projects and it's important to remember
them for your own project. So you
remember, oh, I remember this experiment
we did on humans. Oh, I remember how
many images we needed for that project.
And then that can that can help you make
decisions faster. And then the other
thing that is worth highlighting is the
human um experiments. We're going to do
a lot of human experiments starting with
the next example and those are usually
helpful to make quick decisions in your
project when you're in the industry. So
second project trigger word detection.
Let me give some context on this. the
general problem. Um, okay, you're
familiar with like Alexa and all these,
let's say Siri and things like that that
you might have in your kitchen listening
to you. Everybody knows. So, um, the way
these network typically work, these
models is it's not a single model, it's
a cascade of models for energy and
efficiency purposes. So for example, if
you have a virtual assistant in your
kitchen, the first model is activity
detection. It just detects if there is
any volume, you know, because you don't
want to listen with the heavy model at
all time. It just uses a lot of energy,
right? You want a very lightweight model
that understands when volume is playing.
And so let's say this uh network detects
volume. It calls another network that is
focused on the activation word, the
trigger word. Alexa see hey Siri okay
Google that's usually the second layer
um and that one is only listening for a
specific keyword if the keyword comes in
it would typically call a better model
that's slightly slower that might be
heavier and more energy consumption and
that might understand uh your what
you're trying to do you know and then
I'm not going to go into the details but
you have architectures that get very
complicated back in the days some of
these companies were doing one model to
set up a timer, one model to buy
something online, one model was very
complicated. Today it's slightly simpler
and more end to end, but I just want you
to know the cascade of models that are
being called because this case study is
about the second model is about the
trigger word. So here's my problem for
you. Given a 10-second audio speech,
detect the word activate. How would you
build that off the shelf like that
starting from no zero?
What data would you collect?
>> Yep.
>> So we are looking at frequencies that uh
like receive and from frequency we want
to uh figure out what was the word and I
think we also want to look at the
length.
>> Okay. How long was this?
And then we will run some kind of
algorith
like a 4 year transform or Okay. What
you described is a 4 year transform or
like plus the pre-processing. You're
right. So you're saying audio is a bunch
of frequencies with you know values and
we want to first pre-process that then
to give it to an algorithm and the
length of the sequence matters as well
because if you want to detect the word
activate you know that the length needs
to be I mean there's a minimum length
you can't say activate in less than 10
milliseconds right so the the length
matter as well okay that that's good
insight what else what data how how
would you collect that data
>> yes Microphone.
>> Microphone like with your phone. Okay.
Like you would go around campus and
record people. How would you what would
you ask them to say?
>> The word activate.
>> Okay. You would ask you would record a
bunch of people saying the word
activate. You would ask them anything
else.
>> Other words. Yeah.
>> Say a sentence.
>> Say a sentence. Yeah. It turns out you
have website that are random generators
and you just say say this and say this
and you record everything. Yeah. Say the
word deactivate.
>> Ah, good one. So, you're saying you want
to find negative words that are close to
the positive word just to make sure that
the model learns that. That's a great
one. Yeah. Actually, turns out activate
is a really bad word to choose. The
reason Alexa and actually there was a
lot of discussions at Amazon back in the
days around what would the word be and
turns out it's very important what you
choose because you want to choose a word
that is not used in common language
otherwise your assistant is always
turning on right and Alexa is not ideal
either it's not bad but it's not ideal
either um okay so let me just narrow
down the problem let's say we've gone
around campus and we've collected a
bunch of 10-second audio clips Okay. Um,
do we need to think about the
distribution of the data? Like why does
it matter like why campus only might be
limited? Let's say
>> yeah don't get a lot of accents.
>> Okay. Accents. Turns out the first
version of this model um that you know I
I built with Andrew um my German friends
could not make it work. none of my
German friends would make it work and we
had to collect more data from and I had
two German roommates at the time. So, we
had to collect more data from them
because there's just a certain way that
you know people would say words. Um,
okay, good insight. What else other than
accents?
>> Yes,
>> good point. Average age on campus is
probably younger than if you actually
cross campus and go to Palo Alto. Um and
in fact the frequencies are going to be
different that younger people use.
That's correct.
>> Yeah.
>> Cadence, how fast you say words,
>> how fast some people speak fast, some
people and it has to do with the
language of origin. Some people just
speak faster. Um correct. And look look
at this. Like when you hear someone who
speaks fast versus someone who speaks
slow, it doesn't make a big difference
to you as a human. But if you actually
just had access to the numbers and the
frequencies, it would look completely
different. So the model actually
struggles a lot with that problem. Yeah.
>> I don't know if this is very important
for the ratio of male to female.
>> Yeah, for sure. Ratio of male to female.
Anything that would modify your
frequencies and on average, yes, there's
different frequencies or distribution
male to female. Yeah.
>> Background noise very important. Turns
out on Stanford campus you don't hear
the metro.
So it's very likely that your algorithm
will not work for people in New York
that are taking the subway all the time
because of the background noise behind
it. Yeah. Okay. I think we get a sense
of like the again the complexity of the
task ahead of us. Uh let's say the input
is a 10-second audio clip I'm going to
call X. And this audio clip has a few
things that are special to it.
So one of the things is uh negative
words which are in purple, positive
words which are um in green and then the
background is in orange. Okay, so this
is for example someone saying hi
activate yourself whatever you know you
see what I mean activate is the positive
word. Uh what's the resolution we'd
want?
Okay, I'm not going to ask you this
question because we don't have speech
expert. A speech expert would know it.
Um, what you can do though without being
a speech expert is to go on GitHub and
find another speech project and you
actually search for the hyperparameters
they're using and if you're using human
audio, you'll find that the same numbers
will work for your project. Okay?
So, you do that little search and you'll
find that there is just a certain sample
rate that works well with human voice.
Uh, what's the output?
01
>> 0 one. Okay, let's try something. So,
let's say the output is 01. Zero meaning
there's no positive word. The word
activate is not there. One meaning there
is a positive word in that 10-second
audio clip. So, we're going to do a
little human experiment. I've selected
three um let me turn the volume on. I've
selected three uh uh audio samples of
around 10 seconds. Okay. Um, I'm not
going to tell you what the language is,
okay? Because the model doesn't know
language when we start training it. So,
you're acting like the model. That's the
experiment. I'm just telling you that
the first and the third sample have the
word that we're looking for. And I'm not
telling you what the word is again
because the model doesn't know what the
word is at the beginning of training.
Okay? So, now up to you to guess what
the word is. And I hope one of you will
save us and find the word. Okay? Okay,
let's try
too loud. Second sample.
Wait, let me see if I can put the
microphone here.
Anybody has it or no? No. Impossible.
Third one.
>> Okay. Who has the word?
Okay. Maybe that's not it. But maybe.
Yeah. In the back.
>> You're Italian.
>> You speak Okay.
Uh, yeah. It's funny. Nobody finds it
usually in the first try, but you you do
you did find it. Yeah, that's great. Um,
okay, let's try again. Um, and uh do it
with a different labeling scheme this
time. Okay, let's try again. I'm going
to play it again, but the labeling
scheme has changed.
Okay,
it's the first one.
Third one.
[Music]
Okay.
What's the word? Someone who's not
Italian speaker.
I'm not sure people heard. So I want to
try someone else. Yeah. You you've heard
it
>> something like
>> Okay. Not for promojo, it's pomeio, but
you're close, you know. Um, was it
easier the second time or the first
time?
>> Way more. Way easier. So, if it's easier
for you, it's easier for the model
basically. Um, and so what is the
question I'm posing here is we could go
with the first labeling scheme, which is
easier for us to label frankly, right?
You don't need to indicate the location
of the word. Um, but how much more data
do you think we need in order for the
model to figure it out? It's probably a
thousandx data, right? And so the
question is, is the second labeling
scheme a thousand times harder for us to
label than the first one? And the answer
is no. So the answer is very clear. You
would rather have the second labeling
scheme and your model is going to learn
way faster than in the first case.
So that's a type of human experiment you
can do. Now we're going to we're going
to use that labeling scheme. Yeah.
Question
>> for the labeling. This is right.
>> Yeah. We'll talk about it.
>> Question. Is it manual labeling or not?
Yes. Right now it's manual but I'll
explain some tricks we can use. Yeah.
>> Is there a tradeoff where you do you
spend a lot more time to label something
but then it does better on the model
like how do you
>> Yeah. you you you how do you pick the
trade-off between the different labeling
strategies and not in fact you you you
know today you could have you could have
a pre-training and a post-raining that
have different labeling schemes. Um the
the question is for pre-training you
want the model to get really good and
you don't want to you want to avoid a
cold start problem. The problem of the
cold start is with the first labeling
scheme, maybe even with a thousand data
points that you detect that that you
collect and label manually, it's not
even going to understand anything. So
you need the second labeling scheme can
be a great way to um work around the
cold starts. You might need less data,
but it will start understanding what you
mean and then the rest of the data might
be labeled differently essentially. Um
okay, let me talk a little bit about the
labeling scheme. We're actually going to
use a slightly different labeling
scheme. And the reason is the first the
one with one one and only zeros. Um the
risk is you can actually have a model
that performs 99.9% accurate that is all
zeros. Just predict zero all the time.
It's very accurate. But the thing is
there's just one one to find and it's
very hard to find it. And so the network
is going to lean toward zeros. Meaning
the data is the labels are so skewed
towards zero that it's going to be hard
to find any signal in it. And so the
trick that deep learning researchers use
generally is can we actually do a little
more balanced um between the positive
and the negative labels. Just a pure
engineering hack. Not much science
behind it. Uh the last activation we're
going to use a sigmoid but because it's
a sequential problem we're going to use
sigmoid in sequence. At every time step
there's going to be a sigmoid
activation. And then the architecture,
we're going to learn it later in the
class. You don't need to worry. This
would be likely an RNN. You'll learn
later in the class what that means. And
then the loss function. Can someone
guess what loss function we would be
using?
>> Yes.
>> Yeah. Binary cross entropy. But we're
going to use it sequentially. Meaning at
every step we're going to compute that
with the sigmoid output. Yes.
>> Sorry. On the output. So you just label
the activate word as multiple ones.
>> Correct. You take your your input
10-second input. You look at where the
positive word activate is and you put
ones in there when it plays
and you force the model to predict, hey,
activate has been played. There's a lot
of nuances you're see because you
actually are going to build this project
with like, do we want the ones to start
exactly when the words start? Do we want
to have a delay? There's a lot of
technical questions around that. Yeah.
You had a question.
>> I was wondering like what do you mean by
steps? Like
>> what I mean by steps is audio is a
sequence data. Um and so it's time step
by time step. And so what I mean is that
at every time step, whatever your sample
rate is, you're going to have a
prediction at every step. Okay. Um so
what what is critical to the success of
this project is really the labeling
strategy. Here is how we did it. Um uh
and you know it's a you just have to
know it or not know it. It actually
takes a long time to figure something
like that out. And so thankfully when I
was a grad student, one of my uh senior
senior PhDs helped me with these methods
and he was able to guide me and saved me
probably months because I would not have
figured out myself this probably. So
here's what we did. We took three
databases. We created three databases.
One that would have positive words. So
as you were saying earlier, we record
people for the word activate. One that
would have negative words. other words
including deactivate but also kitchen
and lion and dog and whatever. And then
we have background noise. Um turns out
background noise in audio data is almost
free. There's just a ton of background
noise online. You can go on many
platforms online video platforms. You
can just take the audio it will be
background noise. So background noise is
free. You don't need to go and collect
it most likely. Uh the other two are
though are harder. Yeah. Question. Did
you record those first two yourself?
>> Yeah.
>> How many?
>> So, I'll tell you. We we I'll tell you
how we do it in a second, but yes, we
recorded everything manually. Um, what
we did is we took we went online. We
scraped free license data. Actually,
it's a skill to know the licensing
models. You're going to learn that in
the project mentorship with the TAs.
What licensing allows you to do what
with data. It's good to know forever.
You learn it once and then you know what
is CC by? what is CC byn NA, what is the
MIT license, what is the Apache license,
etc. Um, and so we take 10-second audio
clips, we clip the background noise, and
we went around campus and we literally
recorded people saying activate in other
words, and we cut it when they said it.
So the word was contained exactly to the
amount that it was needed. Then we
created a Python script that randomly
inserts words randomly, non-over
overlapping words. So for example, this
would be created synthetically. I would
have 10 second of background noise. I
would insert two negative words and I
would insert one positive word. Okay,
the trick is that because the Python
script did that, the Python script knows
where activate was put so it can label
automatically.
And so it turns out that we went around
campus, we used an app even to get help.
So we hired a couple of people to come
with us. each brought their phone and we
went all around campus recording people
to say activate in other words and we
created those data sets. Within three
hours we had millions of data points. Um
because think about it let's say you
have a thousand activates across campus
10,000 other words infinite background
noise. Imagine how much data you can
create with that. When you actually
write the Python script you can also add
some data augmentation. You can reduce
some frequencies. You can augment some
frequencies, you can accelerate it, you
can decelerate it. So you can actually
create a pretty meaningful data set for
this problem in 3 hours.
Now I'm talking about training sets
because you don't want to use that data
for test sets. For test sets, you want
data to be as real as possible. You're
familiar with the concept of train and
test set, right? Everyone? So for the
test set, we had to manually label data,
but it was a much smaller set than the
training set,
right? So it's much more convenient.
Okay. The second um important part was
architecture search. I'm not going to
talk about it too much here, but there
are architectures that just work better
for these types of problems. And um this
is an example of an architecture on the
right that works way better. Um and my
learning from that project was just go
to the expert and ask them what they've
tried and try to learn from their
mistakes. And in fact, I remember on
Hanun which was in the first first level
at the Gates computer science building
and he knew that this architecture was
going to fail and he knew why because
he's done so many speech projects and he
just knows what works and what doesn't
work.
So that's why your TAs are here for
actually in your projects.
So you should give them a call and say
hey is what I'm doing good or give me a
pointer for what I might spend my next
week doing. Uh okay. So learnings from
this section this case study uh data
collection strategy is extremely
important including the data labeling
strategy using human experiments matters
as well and then uh referring to expert
advice that's the type of thing you want
to do in a project.
Okay. Do you understand conceptually how
such project is built now at a high
level? Okay. Good. Yeah. Question at
>> the application layer. How often do you
have to create your own?
>> So, how often do you need to do an
architecture search? Um, nowadays, um,
less often than before. But this class
is all about understanding what's going
on under the hood. So, we're going to
walk you through that. In practice,
um, it depends on your problem. Like
I'll give you in the industry you might
have a you might be building a company
that requires the model to be running on
the browser and so you have additional
constraints that push you to create your
own architecture, collect your own data,
fine-tune the model the way you want.
For many startups out there and
companies out there, you're going to
start from a foundation model. going to
start from a foundation model and then
you might actually quantize it or prune
it or modify it to meet your needs in
terms of latency, in terms of memory, in
terms of hardware capacity and knowing
what's going on like we did is important
in those cases. Yeah.
Okay. Uh, super. So, we're 1 hour in. We
are about halfway through the class. A
little bit ahead and I have a few more
case studies to cover with you.
Okay. By the end, we'll have a full set
of proxy projects to work with. Okay, so
this one is cool. It's face
verification. Um, a school wants to use
face verification to validate student
IDs in facilities like dining halls,
gym, and pool. So, let me explain what
what it is. It's like you arrive at the
Ariyaga gym and instead of uh uh just,
you know, normally you would swipe your
student ID, right? and your picture will
show up on the screen and there's
someone sitting there. It's going to
compare the picture they're seeing on
the screen to the picture they're seeing
with their eyes and if it's the same
they're going to say you can go ahead,
right? This slightly different here. Um
you're going to you're going to be uh
verified by a camera. So, there's
actually a camera ahead and you're
walking in and you're swiping your card
and we're going to compare the picture
in the database to the picture that is
being taken by the camera to make sure
that it's the same person.
Okay. How do you get started?
Okay. So, everybody who got admitted
uploaded pictures at least one. So, we
have that already in the database.
Correct. Yeah. What else?
>> You're saying the camera matters.
>> Yeah, for sure. The camera matters. In
fact, we talked about resolution. Do you
think the resolution is lower or higher
than the day and night project?
>> Probably higher. In fact, it's going to
be higher. And again, I would go back to
uh literally doing a human experiment
and showing pictures of twins and asking
people if they can differentiate the
twins. Um, and you'll see that the
resolution matters actually. Okay. Yeah.
You wanted to add something?
>> Oh yeah. Um, like you also need like
noise like other people that are not
your student.
>> Okay. Also data from outside the
university.
>> Features.
>> Which features?
>> Uh, the question features that
understand the person's human feature,
but they're already in the picture,
right? So the picture would have the
feature or you would add anything on top
of that.
>> So you typically you would not actually
want to get the feature level. You would
just want to say we need to make sure
it's in the data. If it's in the data,
the neural network will learn it.
>> Like the same person multiple times, you
don't have to
>> absolutely same person multiple times
because the angle matters, the time
matters, the you know, etc. Yeah.
Okay. Same thing. Okay.
>> Trying to crop the image so that the
differences.
>> Okay. So, you're saying we might do some
pre-processing to crop all the images so
that it's centered or at least that the
image that we're trained the model with
looks like the image that the camera is
going to take because the model will run
on the camera. Okay. All these are good.
So, let's say our data set is picture of
every student labeled with their name.
So, this is one of my friends Bertron
and he has his picture which is this
picture from the student ID. Um, and
then the input is okay. He shows up in
front of the build the building. He's a
little bit confused, but he showed up
and a picture was taken. Uh, the
resolution we talked about it. What we
use here is 412 412x3. It's much higher
than before. Okay, as we were expecting
because we need small details. Even eye
color is identifiable, right? So these
things we cannot find without a higher
resolution. In fact, if you actually go
through um airport security and you use
some of these fast tracks which take a
picture of you, trust me, the resolution
is going to be even higher than that.
Much higher than that because they're
actually getting into the iris at that
level. Right. So, what's the output? The
output is zero or one. Yeah, it's
Bertron or it's not Bertron. Okay, we're
we're good so far.
U the architecture. Um let let me
actually um let me actually ask you uh
how would you uh do this comparison
without neural networks? Let's say a
very basic way if you had to start with
the first method.
Yeah. like
list of characteristics.
>> So you would feature engineer, you would
say like for example, you would define
10 features that are good for
identifying people and you would have a
filter for each of them and you would
run it on the picture and say yes, do we
have this feature or not? Essentially,
okay. Yeah, it's a good one. Even more
basic than that would be a pixel
comparison. You just compare the two
pixels. What's the problem with doing a
a pixel comparison? So, the idea is I
take the two pictures, I compare them,
and if they're close enough in
pixel-wise comparison, then it's the
same person. If they're far, it's not
the same person. What can go wrong?
>> Difference in lighting.
>> Difference in what?
>> Lighting.
>> Lighting. Yeah. Actually, what's
interesting with the lighting is if you
look here, so in this one, you take the
top left pixel right here. Okay, it's
bright. You take the top left pixel on
this one, it's dark or at least dark
green. The difference between these two
pixels is massive. It's close to 255.
Yet, the pixel doesn't even matter. So,
why would you use that? It would
penalize the comparison without actually
mattering at all. So, that's a good
point. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Absolutely. background difference
translation invariance. Like imagine the
same picture but the person is like
three pixels to the right. The
comparison will be completely different
because it's a pixel comparison rather
than a semantically meaningful
comparison. Okay. What are other things
that can go wrong?
>> The distance from the camera.
>> Distance from the camera. Again, you
know, rotation invariance, translation
invariance, scale invariance, all of
these matter. What what are other things
that are not geometric modifications?
Yeah.
>> Wearing glasses or hats.
>> Wearing glasses or hats. What else?
>> Hairstyle. Yeah. The beard, you know.
And in fact, uh you look here, he has
much more beard than on the picture. And
he was much younger by the way on the
first picture.
And often time uh uh we look we're
younger on our student IDs than we
actually are in person. And that may
make a difference. Okay. So these issues
we all we all talked about. I think
people get it. Good. So our solution is
to use the concept of encoding. You
remember what we talked about earlier
with the face example. It turns out a
network that has been trained to
understand faces should have meaningful
information in those layers that you can
use as comparison that is more
meaningful than a pixel comparison. So
this is how it goes. We have Bertron
picture from the student ID. We run it
through a deep neural network and we get
a vector.
What is this vector? It's a vector that
we grab in the middle of the network
somewhere. Remember what I said? If the
if the if the vector is taken earlier in
the network, we're going to get lower
level features. If you go deeper, it's
going to get more facial features. So,
you probably go slightly deeper. You go
much deeper actually for this example.
And then same thing, you you run the
exact same network um on the picture
from the camera. And normally if the
network was trained well, those two
vectors should be close to each other.
Distance is 0.4. You set a threshold.
You might do a little study to see
what's the right threshold. And of
course, this threshold is going to
determine the number of true positives
that you're going to get versus false
positives versus false negatives. You
know, the higher the threshold, the more
likely you make a mistake. The more
relaxed you are, right? So here, let's
say I set a threshold of 0.5. Hey, I'm
confident enough that this is Bertron.
And again, airport security might have a
much higher lower threshold than the
dining hall at Stanford, obviously, you
know. Okay. So, this is the general idea
behind what we want to do, but I still
haven't talked to you about how the
network is trained. The network right
now is not trained. We haven't learned
how to train it. Yeah. Question
>> question network you use. Is it like
just a regular uh picture classification
network that has a binary output or is
it
>> Yeah, what's the network? We'll learn
it. Actually, we're going to see it
together. Yeah, I'll describe it. But I
don't want to get into the architectural
nitty-gritty. Uh I want to focus on the
general training scheme that we're going
to use and then you're you're actually
going to build that at some point in the
quarter. Yeah. Other question?
>> Yes. This uh 128 dimensional vector,
what exactly hidden features are there?
>> Yeah. what's what are the hidden
features in the 128 dimensional vector?
Uh we don't know. That's the point of
deep learning is you have to create a
loss function that will modify your
parameters in a way that forces it to
learn features. But I can tell you that
a dimension number three is for eyes and
dimension number six is for ears. I can
make a study. We we'll study it later
this quarter and tell you that this
neuron is actually good at detecting
certain types of features, but right now
I can't tell you unless I do that study.
No. Um, okay. So, question for you. What
how would you build a training and a
loss function to make that possible to
train that network? Do you have ideas?
It's not an easy question. Okay. Try
where to start.
Yes.
>> So mean squared error between what?
You're right. Actually, two vectors mean
square error because it's a you know.
Yeah. But
probably.
>> So are you saying we would take pairs of
pictures, we will run it through the
network, we will then take the two
vectors that we get and do
apply the loss function some distance L1
distance L2 distance and then trace it
back and say these were the same people
you should have been closer. That's what
you mean? Yeah, it's a good idea. Yeah.
Someone else wanted to say something.
[Music]
>> Yeah, that's another one. Coine
similarity that could also be our loss
function.
>> Okay. Like what?
>> Great idea. Data augmentation. So you
would you say I can take the picture of
Bertron and probably mirror it, flip it,
rotate it, crop it, and I would use more
data that way. Yeah, absolutely. That's
that would help a lot actually. Okay, so
all of these are good ones. Um, if I
summarize your point though, because
that's really the key to the designing a
good loss function. What we really want
is that similar picture of the same
person end up with similar vectors and
picture of different people end up with
different vectors if we rephrase it in
plain English. So what we'll do is that
we'll build a data set of triplets. The
triplets includes a picture that is the
anchor, a picture that is the positive.
The reason it's called positive is
because it's the same person as the
anchor. and a picture that is called the
negative because it's a different person
than the anchor and by definition also a
different person than the positive.
>> What do you have one picture?
>> One picture of a person. Great question.
If you have one picture of a person,
then you can't do that.
We'll actually see another method that
would allow us to do it even with one p
one picture of a person. Yeah,
>> you can kind of rotate.
>> You can rotate it. That's true. You
could actually do some data augmentation
as he was mentioning um and build a data
set starting with one picture but this
approach will not be the best one. We'll
see another approach right after that
would work better.
>> Yeah.
>> Why are we comparing like a vector from
the model
instead of just comparing the output the
output?
>> Uh oh good question. Why do we compare a
vector rather than the output of the
model? Right. Um, so what's the output
of the model? We actually haven't talked
about the architecture, but I'm assuming
you're saying it's a binary number is
between 0 and one. Because it's a single
dimension, it cannot hold meaningful
information. So you probably want to
have a vector that is big enough where
you believe it has enough flexibility to
hold information that can allow to us to
verify if the same person is on the
picture. Yeah. Essentially. Okay, I'm
going to move on. and so what we want is
to minimize the encoding distance
between the anchor and the positive and
we want to maximize the encoding
distance between the anchor and the
negative. So question for you. What I'm
going to ask you is to take 10 15
seconds look at the slide and you're
going to start voting
for A, B or C.
By the way
is encoding. It's just how I call the
the vector that we get out of the
network.
A is the anchor, N is the negative and P
is the positive.
>> So A is the anchor picture. uh n is the
negative picture which is different from
the anchor the different person and p is
the positive picture which is the same
as the anchor
and ank of a is when you run a through
the network you get the vector ank of a
okay let's look at the results
a
47 for A, 23 for B, 3 for C. So
someone who said good job first, that is
correct. Um, someone who selected A
wants to tell us why. Yeah,
>> because
the anchor and the positive, you just
minimize the distance right there. But
maximizing distance between the anchor
and the negative was the same as
minimizing the negative.
>> Correct. Correct. Great. So actually the
key word here is minimize. If I had said
maximize, the answer indeed as you say
would have been different because here
we're looking at minimizing the distance
between the anchor and the positive and
in fact minimizing this or maximizing
the opposite of it. That's why the
answer is a.
Okay, good stuff. Let's keep going.
Um so going back to the initial setup
um we had a cat and we were predicting a
binary number. Here instead we have
three pictures going through the network
in parallel. So you can imagine it's
batch processing. It's like the three
are going in the same network at the
same time and then you're getting three
vectors. You're computing the loss
function.
Okay. You're doing this loss function we
talked about. I'm not going to talk here
about the alpha number, but you're going
to learn when you build it why the alpha
number matters.
Hint is maybe zero would have been a
correct answer if you didn't have the
alpha number. So it would have created
instability in the model. Uh but you do
that many many times. you push the
parameters to the right or the left and
because of the way you created your loss
function and your data labeling um your
the way you structured your data and the
loss function. Um essentially the model
is going to learn by itself to create
similar encoding for pictures that are
of the same person and separate
encodings for pictures that are not from
the same person. And you didn't need to
do feature engineering. You didn't need
to talk about eyes and ears and whatever
because it will figure it out. you know
that you created the learning
environment to allow that to happen.
So congratulation, you designed your
first loss function and we're going to
design many more in this course. Um this
by the way is from facenet. It's a it's
a paper from 2015 from shortal and
you'll see in the slides I used I always
put the the reference to the papers in
case you want to go back and study the
actual paper. Many students do it for
their projects. This is a great one,
great great paper to to look lot of
citations as well. Um, let me make it
slightly complicated, more complicated.
We learned face verification. Now we
want to do face identification. How is
that different?
Identification is a school wants to use
um to recognize students in facilities.
So imagine face verification is you
swiped your card and then that picture
was compared to the picture of the
camera. That's verification. The two are
they the same or not? Identification is
you have this picture in the database
somewhere the person enters immediately
you can identify them you know. So the
difference for for those of you who fly
in the US is when you when you go
through global entry
uh many people don't even need to put
their passport or anything. They just
watch look at the camera and they move
on. That's identification. Okay. But
actually when you're in Europe for
example, you put your passport in, then
you walk in, then it takes a picture.
That's verification. Is it the
difference or no? Yeah.
actually
>> uh no in real time that's a great
question I didn't talk about it. At
train time, you you have databases and
you you create the triplets
automatically like you pick pictures
from the same person or you use data
augmentation and you add a random
picture from someone else. You create
millions of triplets like that or
billions of triplets. At test time, you
only take the picture from the camera,
run it, you don't use a negative. You
just take the picture from the camera,
you run it through the network, the
person swipes, you take the picture from
the swipe, run it through the network,
you do the comparison, you let them in
or not. So there's no more negative at
test time in practice. It's just a trick
to train the model. Okay. So how would
you do face identification using what we
learned for face verification? Is there
any small tweak you can make that would
make this network work for
identification?
Yes.
>> Correct. Correct. What is it called in
machine learning?
>> There's a machine learning algorithm
that we can stack on top of what we just
did.
>> He said you can compare. So because we
don't have two pictures anymore, we just
have one from the camera. You just
compare the vector of the You run this
by the network. You get the vector and
then you compare it to the database.
>> No, good. Good. Good try. You have a
database of all the student pictures.
You run everything through the network.
Instead of storing the image, you store
the vectors. And then someone shows up
and you're looking in the database. Is
there any vector that is super close to
this one? That's identification. What is
this algorithm called in machine
learning?
It's pretty simple algorithm.
No.
Okay, I'm going to make it easier. What
if instead of having one picture of a
student in the database, you had three
of each student. You have three vectors
for each person,
and then you're trying to find the
nearest vectors in the database from the
one that the camera takes.
I used the keywords.
>> No
neighbors.
>> Yeah. K nearest neighbors. That's a K
nearest neighbor algorithm. It's it's
essentially you you want to explain uh
what you what you meant. Why is it K
nearest neighbor?
>> Well, I was just thinking about like
what's the nearest vector?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. It's K nearest neighbor in high
for high dimensional vectors. So here is
a simple example of K nearest neighbor
for two dimensions. In practice it's 128
dimensions. So I can't put it on a slide
of course but let's say in green you
have the query point. The query point is
the camera picture. Okay. And then you
you run a nearest neighbor algorithm and
you say are there three vectors in the
database that are close to this vector
and you can add additional checks. Are
these three vectors from the same
person? If they are, then it's very
likely the person is correct because you
just could prove that the three closest
vectors in the database are from three
the same person three times. So it's
higher likelihood. You could even do it
for 10 nearest neighbor if you want to
be really secure. Let's say you go to
the airport every time and every time
they take a picture of you and now they
can do a 10 nearest neighbor um on on
that search. Does that make sense? Now
slightly more complicated. You want to
do face clustering. So, you know, in
your phone sometimes it says um it put
automatically all the pictures from your
mom in one folder and from your dad in
another folder, right? How does it do
it? How could you make a tweak to again
what we created or encoding network? How
can you use that to create that?
>> CINS. Yeah, exactly. CINS algorithm
which is an unsupervised learning
algorithm clustering. So you have a
bunch of pictures, you have vectorized
all of them with the network you
trained. And normally the vectors that
are from the same person should be
clustered around the same place. And
that's very simply how big companies do
it on your phone.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah. So if if the person is not in the
database, then you shouldn't find any
vector that is close to the vector
you're taking picture of. The closest
vector might be above your threshold in
terms of distance and you wouldn't let
that person in.
>> I think that's why they make you like
sign up for
>> Yeah, for sure. Yeah, they make you sign
up. So it's interesting because
companies know that they need to build
these these algorithms and then some
like the admission process the signup
process might include certain data
points and now you're starting to
understand how it's used in the
background right okay uh let's move on
yeah one question
>> oh I good question so are you comparing
each new picture so I take a picture um
of my mom with iPhone,
what's going to happen? This picture is
going to likely, if you're doing
clustering, is going to be compared to
the centroidid of my mom. So, the phone
keeps probably a centroidid of my mom.
And if it's close enough to this
centroid over another centroid, it's
going to probably put it in that folder
essentially. No. Yeah. One more question
and then we'll move on.
>> Yeah. What algorithm do you use to
determine how many centroidids you want?
>> Ah, yeah. There is Okay. How many How do
you figure out how many centrids you
want? There is an algorithm I you you'll
study it in CS229 not in CS230 but you
know
okay
uh okay what we learned here is what an
encoder network is we learned about
positive anchor negative for the triplet
loss the loss I showed you is called the
triplet loss because of the triplets and
then we learned the different variations
of phase verification identification and
clustering now we're going to get to an
interesting section which is brand new
um around self-supervised learning. So
note that everything we did so far the
day and night classification
um the trigger word detection and the
triplet loss were supervised learning.
We had labels essentially day and night
is very classic supervised learning. You
label data with zero and one. Same for
trigger word detection. Face
verification you can can can debate can
be different but anyway we we focused on
supervised learning. Now, we're going to
talk about self-supervised learning. And
my question for you is the following.
Um, labeling is expensive. We know that.
So, how would you redo what we did with
a different approach that does not
require labels?
Meaning you remember even in face
verification we sort of had the name of
the students in the database with their
face and we might have multiple pictures
of them. Let's say you don't even have
that. You just have faces in the wild
unlabeled.
How would you do things differently?
Any idea? Yeah.
>> Okay.
Let the neural network find the pictures
that are close to each other, but how
would you train that network? Like
you're starting with a network that
doesn't do anything and you give it an
image. It gives you a random vector at
first. So how would you train it? Yeah,
>> do some kind of clustering and then use
those as like
>> do some clustering offline. But again my
question is the clustering algorithm how
is it trained? How do you cluster if you
don't have any encoder network?
Because the clustering came after we
trained the encoder network. The
clustering only worked because we had a
good encoder network.
>> But if you have like for example a bunch
of pictures of the same person and then
you run that through the network, right?
>> But you don't know if it's the same
person. That's what I'm saying is like
>> vectors would be similar.
>> No, because that's the network you're
training. The vectors are not similar
because that's that's the network we
want to train right now. You I gave you
a network. It's completely random. You
give it my picture on Saturday and on
Sunday the vectors are completely off.
So how do you start? Yeah. Yeah. You
want
>> it?
>> Okay. Tell me more.
>> Okay. Okay. Yeah, you're ahead. But but
uh we we'll study that in two weeks
actually. So we'll do auto to encoders
two weeks from now in class. Um anyone
else has an idea? Yeah.
Okay. It's actually similar to what he
was saying to reconstruct the original
image. Yeah, that's what we learned.
It's it's you know there's a lot of
methods. Diffusion models work like
that. Autoenccoders. Uh we'll learn
about that in two weeks when we focus on
generative AI, generative modeling. Um
here um I want to present uh also a sort
of a generative method but it's really
interesting because it will be your
foray into self-supervised learning.
Here is the idea. If we have pictures in
the wild going with the methods you had
mentioned around data augmentation you
can actually force the network to learn
from the data itself. So let me give you
an example. I take you you look at the
picture of this dog and you rotate it by
90°. It's still the same dog, right? A
human would say it's the same dog. What
are we using in our brain? We're using
the ability to understand rotation
invariance and to understand the
semantics of the dog. And so
technically, if you gave those two
images to the network,
um you could create a loss function that
compares those two pairs and has to have
vectors that are close to each other.
Does that make sense?
Other thing you can do, you can do a
patch. You can literally take an image
of a face and put a patch on half of the
image,
you know, and then you you say um and
then you do the same thing on the other
image. You put the other patch, the
other half. And now you tell the network
these two should have the same vector
pretty much. So you use your data
augmentation stream scheme on massive
data sets online to force the network to
learn from the data itself.
Okay, no need to forge triplets per se.
You just take a picture, you make a
variance of it with noise, with
rotation, with cropping, with
translation, with whatever you want. And
then you put these two in the data set
and you said these are two the same
person. and it should have the same
vector. Does that make sense? That's why
it's called self-supervised learning
because you don't have labels. You just
create a learning environment that makes
the um the network learn from the
patterns of the data directly itself.
Okay. So this is an example called
Sinclair. Again the paper is is right
there. And this shift from supervised
triplets faceet which was a paper from
2015 to selfsupervised pairs that is why
modern models are trained on billions of
unlabeled images. Okay, that's how we
create. It's much simpler when you think
about it. You can literally write a
script and scrape and it will label
autoleabel the images and put them in
pairs do variations and then you'll end
up with a very powerful pre-trained
model. Much simpler than people think
it's not that hard. You know, at the end
of the day, most of the complexities are
going to come from compute, right? Um,
okay. So, this method is called
contrastive learning. Okay, we're going
to talk about it a little more in two
weeks. Um,
self-s supervision is not only an image
thing. It's also used in other
modalities. For example, in text, the
the the principle is the same. You
predict what belongs together and you
push away what doesn't. That's for
images. And here um what we're what what
the core of GPT, some of you probably
have heard of that um is a method called
next token prediction. We're going to
learn later about tokens in the class,
but today forget about tokens, just
think the words. We're trying to look at
a sentence and predict the next word.
Why is this self self-supervised
learning? Because you don't label data.
You just literally grab data from online
and you create a scheme that forces the
model to learn from the patterns of the
data using self supervised learning. But
the self comes from the fact that you
didn't label it manually yourself.
So let's do a few examples. And the the
reason I want to do the examples is
because we want to talk about emerging
emerging behaviors that stem from the
tasks we defined. So give me the word
you're thinking of. I poured myself a
cup of tea.
>> Some people said tea, coffee. Anybody
said anything else?
>> Water. Cup of water. Healthy people said
what? Okay. Um yeah. So the what's the
emergent behavior that you can expect
the model is going to learn
based on just that example.
>> Yeah, good point. Because you know that
whatever is here first fits in a cup. So
it understands that. The second reason
is poured. So it's a liquid. So just
this sentence without even labeling is
going to generate emerging behaviors
that we've never trained the model for.
That's what's interesting about modern
AI if you will. It's you don't need to
define the tasks you know um the frankly
the same way think about face
verification. Back in the days we used
to do what I showed you where we would
create triplets and we would be very
specific about this is for face
verification. You could actually scrape
all the images online and do the
contrastive learning that I showed you
next and it will still be good at
detecting faces without you having even
defined that task in the first place
just by doing the contrastive
prediction. Second, okay, first example
also again I was trying to predict but
people usually say different things. I
think the majority of people think
coffee it's very cultural. You go in
another country it's going to be tea for
sure. uh and that forces the model um to
really think about everyday
co-occurrence pattern like them you know
being liquid being of a certain size
occurring together. So for example
there's probably a lot of sentences
online that says pouring a cup of tea
and there's a lot saying pouring a cup
of coffee because of that the model
should understand that these two things
are probably close to each other because
their context is similar. Uh second
example
uh the capital of France is
nobody
>> huh
Paris. Okay. Uh what's the emergent
behavior you can expect the model to
learn?
>> Yeah. Learn about facts. Exactly. So
this is really predicting the next token
forces the model to encode real world
facts such as Paris being the capital of
France. Oops. Sorry. Uh, what about the
third example? She unlocked her phone
using her
>> body parts.
>> Body parts.
>> I don't know what your phone type of
phone you have, but uh, wait, what would
you say?
>> Face,
>> face,
>> password,
>> password,
fingerprint. Yeah, all of them are
possible. So again, the network would
learn probably that password,
fingerprint, and face can be used to
unlock stuff, you know. Um, yeah. And in
fact here probably fingerprint or face
might nowadays be the more common
because of how the world has evolved but
back in the days it would be password
for sure. Um and so this forces a
semantic understanding that these things
are probably all meant to unlock
information. Um the next one car the cat
chased the
dog or mouth or ball and again u the
model will learn probabilistic reasoning
meaning because in the data set it will
find variations of this sentence with
different um actually conclusion. It
would say that there's a lot of things
that the cat can chase you know and so
that's probabilistic reasoning. What
about the last one? If it's raining I
should bring an
umbrella.
What's the emerging behavior? It's
reasoning and inference is the model we
learn to connect conditions. So for
example, raining requires you to be
protecting yourself from the rain with
an umbrella. That's reasoning. Okay.
So long story short, emerging behaviors
are unexpected capabilities that arise
from simple training objectives at scale
without being explicitly taught or
labeled.
Later in this class, we're going to have
a full lecture on deep reinforcement
learning where we're going to talk about
emergent behaviors in robotics
or in gaming where turns out the agent
you're training learns to do certain
strategies that you didn't expect they
would do. Alph Go is a good example if
you've watched the documentary.
Okay.
Um,
self-s supervision is not just about
text and images. We've seen the next
token prediction for GPT and we've also
seen constructive learning for images.
My question here is the following. What
other examples of modalities can you
think of
and tell me the task that you would
define? Audio. So for audio, what would
you do?
audio. How would you do a self-s
supervision in audio?
>> Mask out portions of audio.
>> Exactly. Mask out portion. So mask out
20 time steps and because you know what
the data was, you have a label. You knew
what the truth was. You can do a
self-supervision task. It would work
great. Again, the the only limitation is
compute and scale. Uh what other
modalities
driving
conditions?
>> Yeah. So self-driving is a good example.
It's very multimodal. There's a lot of
different things happening in
self-driving. We we'll talk about it in
a future lecture. What what else? What
other modalities can you think of?
>> Videos.
>> Videos. What would you do? Video.
>> Take frames out. You can take some
frames out. Same principle as audio. um
biology. Some people work in healthcare
biology here. Yeah, a couple uh well you
you know about amino acids and uh and
protein structure. You can actually mask
portion of the inputs such as a protein
structure or DNA and and then uh
complete it and it will force the model
to understand those patterns.
So great stuff in there. Um but the
world is very multimodal. We experience
words, images, sounds and actions
together. How can we connect them? When
you think about
multimodality,
you want to connect text and images.
Let's say what do you need to do those?
You actually need label data. You need
image captioned. So, for example, you
have a bunch of picture online of the
cat is looking at the camera. So,
there's a picture and there's a label
underneath. Just like on Instagram,
let's say people put captions, right? Um
and the reason you can connect those
modalities is because of that data set
because you have a lot of that. Now this
is not typically called supervised
learning. It will be called weekly
supervised learning because you're not
actually labeling images with captions.
You are benefiting from naturally
occurring pairings in the world. There
is naturally occurring pairings of
images and texts. Okay. So now what I
want you to do is to find other examples
that are not just images captioned but
naturally occurring examples of
different modalities that appear in the
wild together that we could use to
connect modalities. The whole point of
connecting modalities is that our
vectors now can represent
different modalities close to each other
in space. Okay,
so think about that.
Please continue. I'm going to read some
of the answers, but we keep going.
Okay. So, stock price sequence is a is a
single modality. You would you would
look at stock price and you can mask and
then predict. But I think maybe what you
mean is you would put additional data
points in there as well. Uh, let me see
if I have something. Audio paired with
video. Audio and video is a great one.
Audio and video is naturally paired. You
know, you take a YouTube video. It has
the audio and the video. And so when a
dog is barking,
uh, you have the audio of the dog
barking and the video of the dog
barking. And so you can create a pairing
between those two modalities.
Uh, transcription. So a lot of movies
have subtitles. And so by definition, a
video stream or stream of images will be
naturally connected to text, which would
also be naturally connected to audio.
Music and song title, again, that's a
great one. Audio and text are connected.
Genotype and phenotype. Good one as
well.
Medical imaging with ultrasound. That's
a great one. Naturally occurring. You
usually if you go do an ultrasound,
you'll have the different types of
images that occur together naturally.
Game footage and keyboard action. Again,
another great one. So, you know, price
scenario code. Good one. the uh yeah
great great examples uh facial
expression. So TLDDR is
we have ways to connect modalities. Um
often times some modalities are going to
connect very naturally. Most things
connect to text.
So that's what you want to use as your
shared space typically. But here this is
an example of a paper called image bind.
And the interesting thing about image
bind is it says that u most um most
things connect through a single
modality. So for example thermal data
connects to imaging. Imaging connects to
text. So text is going to connect
through images with thermal data.
And what's the consequence of that? If I
may show you a little example is that
you can this is a demo from meta called
image bind. Uh, it's a cool one. You can
actually see things occurring together.
So, for example, you put a text drums
and of course you can get an audio of a
drum,
but you can also see what the closest
image in the vector space is to that
concept. So, all the spaces are now
bound together. Um, you can also do um
audio and image. So, you you you give it
a dog barking
and a picture. What can you expect? A
dog on the beach. That's the multimodal
embedding, the connecting tissue between
those different modalities. And that's
probably one of the biggest um
innovation of the last few years,
connecting those shared spaces. Okay,
I'm not going to cover the full paper,
but the core insight is that there are
shared spaces. There are spaces like
text and image that connect to most
modalities that can allow us to connect
those modalities together.
Okay, we learned a lot of things here.
embeddings, self-supervised learning,
contrastive learning, data augmentation,
next token prediction, weekly supervised
learning, and then the shared embedding
stays with the central pivot usually
being text. Okay. Uh that's all for
today. We're not going to have time to
cover the adversarial example, but we're
going to cover it in two weeks together.
You're going to have more neural network
package